About the Book
How to Make Money Trading with
Candlestick Charts
Japanese rice traders have successfully used
candle signals to amass huge fortunes for
nearly four centuries. Constantly refined an
tested over time, candlestick signals are now
being used the world over for trading all
financial markets, including stocks,
derivatives and currencies, etc.
This book explains step-by-step how you can
make money by trading the powerful and
proven candlestick techniques. Here is how:
Explanation of major candle signals; howto recognize them and use them
effectively
The underlying market psychology
revealed by each candle formation
How to combine candlestick signals with
Western technical analysis to take
advantage of high probability traders
which generate explosive profits
Stop loss settings for various candlestick
signals for cutting losses. Master this and
you will be way ahead of fellow traders
How the use of candlesticks with
technical analysis provides a simple
mechanical trading system which
eliminates emotional interference, panic
and greedHow to use candlestick charts for making
money from longer term trading and
investing
PLUS: proven, market-tested trading
ideas, tips and common mistakes to
avoid based on the author’s rich
experience of trading stocks and options.
This book will enable both new and
experienced traders derive systematic and
consistent trading profits from the market
through candlestick charting.About the Author
BALKRISHNA M. SADEKAR is the founder of
Profitable Candlestick Charting LLC., an
educational company providing training to
stock traders in the proper use of candlestick
charting and technical analysis. He is also a
member of Technical Securities Analyst
Association (TSAASF.org), a leading
authority for technical analysis in the United
States.
With a Masters degree in Engineering,
Sadekar has passionately blended technology
with investor psychology analysis via
candlestick charts. Himself a trader for more
than a decade, he has trained and continuestraining novice and experienced traders in
correctly applying trading systems for
profiting from equity markets.
Sadekar resides in Richmond, VA in the US
and can be reached via his website,
www.ProfitableCandlestickCharting.com.
With this book, which is one of the first
candlestick charting books with Indian stock
charts, Sadekar hopes to get Indian traders
comfortable, confident and successful in the
proper application of candlestick charting.Media Acclaim
“Educative addition to the technical trader’s
shelf.”
— The Hindu Business Line
“Clearly explains the message of each
candlestick pattern. The manifold real life
examples amplify the lessons being taught.
Highly recommended . . . discover ways of
profiting from candlestick trading.” — Alan
Northcott
What the Readers’ Say (Some Unsolicited Readers’ Comments on
Amazon.in)
“One of the best books on this topic.” —
Praveen Kumar
“Excellent book . . . worth reading.” —
Prasad Revdekar
“It is a very good book for those who want
(to) learn trading.”
— Ashish
“Superb book with simple and lucid
language! Worth reading.”— Falak Sayyed
“It’s good . . . must purchase for every
trader.” — Senthil Kumar
“I want people to know that this (author) is
(an) amazing explainer — combined with
simple, understandable language.”
— Muhammed Mominwww.visionbooksindia.com
A Vision Books Original
First eBook Edition, 2016
First Print Edition, 2011
Reprinted 2012, 2015
eISBN
eISBN 10: 81-7094-962-9
eISBN 13: 978-81-7094-962-6
© Balkrishna M. Sadekar, 2011, 2015
First Published in 2011
by
Vision Books Pvt. Ltd.
(Incorporating Orient Paperbacks & CARING imprints)
24 Feroze Gandhi Road, Lajpat Nagar 3
New Delhi 110024, IndiaPhone: (+91-11) 2984 0821 / 22
email: visionbooks@gmail.comContents
Acknowledgements
1.Introduction
2.Candlestick Trading: The Basics
Fear and Greed
Candlesticks Light the Way
Why Bother with Bar Charts?
Stochastics
PART I3.The Doji
Doji
4.Hammer and Hanging Man Signals
Hammer
Hanging Man
5.Inverted Hammer and Shooting Star
Signals
Inverted Hammer
Shooting Star
6.Engulfing Signals
Bullish Engulfing
Bearish Engulfing7.Dark Cloud and Piercing Signals
Piercing Signal
Dark Cloud Cover
8.The Harami
Bullish Harami
Bearish Harami
9.Morning Star and Evening Star
Signals
Morning Star Signal
Evening Star Signal
PART II
10.Combining Candlesticks withTechnical Analysis
Support and Resistance
Moving Averages
11.Trading Setup
Getting Real — Candlesticks Fail,
Too!
Hammer
Inverted Hammer
Bullish Engulfing Signal
Piercing Signal
Bullish Harami
Morning Star SignalHanging Man Signal
Shooting Star Signal
Bearish Engulfing Signal
Dark Cloud Cover
Bearish Harami Signal
Evening Star Signal
Trading Tips from a Candlestick
Trader’s Perspective
12.Candlesticks for Longer Term Trading
Trading for the “Not-So-Active”
Trader
Work with Weekly Charts13.Conclusion
Appendix: Important Candle Signals - A
Ready Reckoner
IndexAcknowledgements
This book would not have been possible
without the help and backing of many friends,
colleagues and family members.
First and foremost, I would like to thank my
loving parents for their support throughout
my life. They are primarily responsible for
cultivating patience and perseverance in me,
without which a trader has no chance of
success. I am also grateful for the wonderful
support and love from my sister and her
family. Special thanks go to my in-laws,
especially my father-in-law, who was
instrumental in providing me a lot of data onthe Indian markets. He has been actively
involved in stock trading and his experience
has been a blessing for me.
I am delighted to take this opportunity to
thank my mentor and a superb fellow trader,
Hugh Terry. Hugh introduced me to
candlesticks and his lessons have been
invaluable to me. There are very few people
in this world who selflessly share their
knowledge and experience with others. Hugh
is one of them.
I would also like to thank folks at Icharts
(www.ichart.com) for allowing me use of
their stock charts. The team of Icharts has
done an excellent job in making available
technical charting to the Indian marketplayers. I am also thankful for all the good
suggestions from members and students of
Profitable Candlestick Charting.
I am highly appreciative of Vision Books and
its Publisher, Kapil Malhotra, for believing
in my efforts and publishing this book.
Lastly, this book would only have been an
idea in my mind if not for two special people
in my life — my princess daughter and my
loving wife. They have been my support and
my inspiration throughout.1
Introduction
The Japanese art of candlestick trading has
been around for nearly four centuries.
Japanese rice traders successfully used these
signal formations to amass huge fortunes.
Since then, the signals have been refined,
tested and utilized in a variety of markets.
Wherever an instrument can be traded in an
open market by traders, candlestick signals
can be used to profit in such markets.
Candlestick signals depict change in investor
psychology. They visually show a trader thesentiments of the other traders in that
particular stock or market. It does not matter
if the signals are applied to commodities,
stocks or futures. Candlestick signals work
with all of them. It does not matter whether
the market is the Nasdaq, the Nikkei, the
German DAX or the Nifty. All of these
markets can be analyzed and traded using
candlestick charting.
Why do people around the world pour their
hard earned money into the financial
markets? Why do they not keep their money
invested in fixed price no risk certificates?
The answer is obvious. They take the risk of
investing in stock, currency and futures
markets in order to get higher returns on their
money. The allure of hitting it big in the stockmarket keeps their dream of financial
independence alive. They look for a good
nest egg to be built from the gains in the
market for a comfortable retirement.
Yet the percentage of investors that actively
manages its portfolios is paltry compared to
those who keep pouring money in the market
hoping they would strike gold someday.
(Henceforth we will use the terms “market”
and “stock market” to include the stock,
commodity and the currency markets.)
Ask yourself which category you fit in from
among the following:
You listen to analysts on TV to get
recommendations for buying stocks.You subscribe to a stock picking service
for your stock investments.
You try out the latest stock picking
software, lose money and start all over
again.
You get your stock investment ideas from
your friends, your colleagues or the local
tea vendor.
You have tried all of the above, lost
money and given up on the stock market
altogether.
If you have done any of the above, you are
not alone. Most investors are the same
everywhere. They keep searching for the one
golden technique that will work each andevery time they put their money in the
markets. They do not spend enough time to
independently study the market itself. They
tend to believe that analysts on TV, who do
all the research and generously offer their
recommendations are motivated by the idea
of making you rich! That is being very naïve,
indeed.
Most traditional investors believe in a “buy
and hold” strategy. They believe in
“averaging down” a stock. Their thinking is
limited to “It will go up one day”. They will
argue against timing the market. These are
the people who spend more time thinking
about what clothes to wear to office on any
day, than they do about their investments and
their financial future.Part of this stems from the fact that real-time
access to market data was very limited till
just a few years ago. People used to be able
to look at their investments only at the end of
the day. Trading costs, i.e. buying and selling
commissions, were also very high. But those
factors are no longer valid. Information
technology has changed the trading scenario.
More and more people are now opening
online trading accounts. They now have
access to real-time instantaneous data.
Technology has also helped to drive down
trading costs considerably.
As the BSE and NSE equity indices rally
because of underlying strong growth
fundamentals of India, individual investors
would naturally want to increasinglyparticipate in the markets. It is extremely
important that these investors and traders
educate themselves in learning the language
of the markets. The markets speak in subtle
ways. They are always giving clues to their
directional movements. Candlestick trading
is all about reading this subtle language of
the markets.
There are more than fifty candlestick signals
defined by Japanese traders. However, of
these we will focus on the most common
ones. You will find that these major
candlestick signals occur often and
repeatedly. Your time as a trader or investor
will be well spent if you understand these
major signal formations.There have been a handful of books written
on candlestick charting so far. Most of these
books have been written from the
perspective of trading the US markets. This
book is specifically written with the Indian
trader in mind. All the included charts are of
companies trading on either the National
Stock Exchange or the Bombay Stock
Exchange.
By the end of this book you will be able to
look at any chart and analyze it yourself. You
will be able to turn off the analysts on TV
and unsubscribe your stock picking service.
You will discover within you the ability to
diagnose the health of the market. That
ability will bring with it the confidence to
enter high probability big profit situationswhich will, in turn, help your portfolio grow
rapidly. However, let me warn you. This is
not a “get-rich-quick-scheme” book. It will
not turn you into an overnight crorepati. The
intention of this book is to teach you how to
use these powerful candlestick techniques
correctly and effectively. Wealth generation
will automatically follow!
The next chapter will go into detail about the
construction of candlesticks and more
importantly the psychology underlying those
candlesticks.2
Candlestick Trading: The
Basics
This chapter is not going to be an essay on
the science of psychology — though it would
be very interesting to know what reputed
psychologists like Carl Jung and Freud
would think about the art of trading! This
chapter will hopefully link in your mind the
importance of psychological underpinnings
of trading stocks.
If someone were to ask me what percentageof trading is comprised of psychological
warfare, I would put the number between
85% and 95%. The stock market is
essentially a game of fear and greed. Supply
and demand are by-products of these two
emotions battling it out for dominance in the
market.Fear and Greed
Fear creates panic. And panic creates supply
in the marketplace.
Greed produces exuberance, giving rise to
demand.
As humans, we cannot escape these two
emotions while trying to make money in the
marketplace.
When you watch a stock you own go down,
you get overwhelmed by fear and anxiety.
Such emotions create havoc in the mind:
How low will the stock go and how
much will I lose?What if my spouse / parents / friends find
out about this pathetic losing trade I
made?
Should I get out now?
What if the stock turns around as soon as
I sell it? How much of a fool would I be
then? And on and on and on.Notice the Fear
On similar lines, what do you think when the
stock you don’t own, but wanted to own,
keeps going up?
I always knew this would be 10-bagger.
Should I buy it now? If I don’t, and it
goes up even more, what a fool I’ll then
be.
This is the stock to own, let me get in
now.
Everybody I know owns this one, I have
to buy it and ride it up. And, on and on.Notice the Greed
We are all slaves to these two emotions.
They are also the trader’s worst enemy. If
you are expecting that I am going to show
you how to master these two, often
overpowering, human emotions, you are
going to be sorely disappointed. For that,
please browse through the self-help section
of your favourite bookstore.
The fact is that experienced and successful
traders know that they cannot master these
two emotions. They know that all profits will
evaporate into thin air if they fall in the trap
of trying to master them. What they do,
however, is design a system and abide by the
system’s rules to execute their trades. Theyrealize that the market is much bigger than
them and their egos. In order to win in the
market, they have mastered the art of
understanding the subtle hints of the market.
This is where candlestick signals assert their
dominance.
Candlestick signals, by the very nature of
how they are constructed, point out the
messages of the market. These signals have
been time tested for over four hundred years.
They would not have been around for this
long if they wouldn’t have had strong
underlying market logic.
These signals depict the outcome of all the
cumulative knowledge of the traders and
investors playing that stock. Stock priceshave little to do with the actual fundamentals
of a company. Instead, they have a lot more
to do with the company’s “perceived”
fundamentals. It does not matter what a
company has achieved till date. If the
perceived growth of the company is doubtful,
then the stock has little or no chance of
appreciation. What would you rather be
buying? A good, well known company but
with little perceived growth or a company
which traders and investors believe will
grow for the next few years. I would buy the
latter. This is what makes the stock market so
dynamic. The fear of losing money and the
greed for making more money creates the
demand-supply imbalances that move stock
prices.If you take away one lesson from this book,
let it be this — as a trader, you should
always be buying into other’s fears and
selling into other’s greed.
And this is not as complex as it sounds. Once
you are done with this book, it will be very
easy to recognize the emotions of the traders
in that stock. Candlesticks make the analysis
visually apparent.
This book is for those who want to make
money in the stock market. And the easiest
way to do that is to live by the above
principle. You can either be a shark in the
ocean or be eaten by one!Candlesticks Light the Way
Let us now look at how candlesticks are
drawn.
You need four price points to draw a single
candlestick. Considering an example of a
daily candlestick, you need:
High price of the day;
Low price of the day;
Opening price of the day;
Closing price of the day.
The two parts of the candlestick are:
The body: This is the part between theopen and the close. In case the day’s
opening price is lower than the closing
price, the colour of the body is white
(some charting services will make this
green). Conversely, when the day’s
opening price is higher than the closing
price, the colour of the body is black
(sometimes shown as red).
The shadows: The upper shadow is the
line above the body and the lower
shadow is the line below the body. In the
case of a black bodied candle, the upper
shadow is from the day’s open price to
its high price and the lower shadow is
from the closing price to the low price of
that day. Conversely, in the case of a
white bodied candle, the upper shadowis between the closing price and the high
price of the day, and the lower shadow is
between the opening price and the low
price of the day.
Note: Throughout this book, the words
“white” candle and “light” candle have been
used interchangeably. Also, the words “black”
candle and “dark” candle have been used
interchangeably.
Figure 2.1 shows the construction of a
candlestick when the closing price of the day
is higher than the opening price of the day.Figure 2.1: White (green) candlestick
depicts that the day’s closing price was
higher than the opening price of the day
Figure 2.2 shows a candlestick where the
closing price of the day is lower than the
opening price of the day.Figure 2.2: Black (red) candlestick depicts
that the day’s closing price was lower than
the opening price of the day
It is not necessary for a candle to have both
the upper and lower shadows. The following
figures depict a few variations of the candle
formation. The reader does not need to
remember the names but should understand
the formation instead.White Morubozu
This is a white candle with no shadows at
either end (see Figure 2.3).
Figure 2.3: White Morubozu
It depicts a day when the low of the day is
the same as the open and the high of the day
is the same as the close price of the day. This
usually represents a very bullish formation
as it shows the bulls had the upper handthroughout the day.Black Morubozu
This is a black candle with no shadows at
either end (see Figure 2.4).
Figure 2.4: Black Morubozu
This occurs when the high of the day is the
same as the open price of the day and the
close of the day is the same as the low priceof the day. What does this candle represent?
It shows domination by the bears throughout
the day. Generally, this would be considered
a very bearish candle.Opening Morubozu
Figure 2.5 shows two cases of an Opening
Morubozu.
Figure 2.5: Opening Morubozu
As you can see, they do not have a shadow
attached to their opening price end of the
body. The white candle denotes that bullstook control right from the start while the
black candle suggests that the bears
dominated right from the open.Closing Morubozu
As can be seen from Figure 2.6, the Closing
Morubozu does not have a tail attached to the
closing price end of the body.
Figure 2.6: Closing Morubozu
The white candle implies that the bulls tookover control during the day and ended the
day strong. On the other hand, the black
candle suggests that the bears took over
during the day and forced the price to close
at the lowest level of the day.Doji
The Doji is one of the most important
candlestick formations. Chapter 3 will
discuss this signal in detail. For now, we
will define the Doji as a candle where the
opening and closing prices are the same.
Figure 2.7 shows a Doji candle.
Figure 2.7: DojiPlease note that given how candlesticks
are constructed, it is very much possible to
have a dark candle even when the price
closes higher compared to the previous
day. Similarly, you can have a white candle
form even if prices close down for the day.
Each candle is independent of the previous
day’s candle. This is a very important
point and you need to make sure you
understand this concept clearly.
The following examples will help clarify the
point:
Let us assume for company XYZ, the
share price closes at ` 50 today. If the
price opens at ` 55 tomorrow, but closes
at ` 53, what colour candle will you seeon the chart? You will see a dark candle.
This is because while the price closed
higher (` 53) than it did the day before (`
50) but it closed below the day’s open (`
55), creating the dark candle.
Consider the company XYZ again with a
closing price of ` 50 for today. If the
price opens at ` 45 tomorrow and closes
at ` 48, you will see a white candle on
the candlestick chart. This is because the
day’s price closed higher (` 48) than its
opening price (` 45). The fact that it
closed below ` 50 (closing price of the
previous day) does not matter in the
construction of the candle.
This is the key powerful concept behindcandlestick charting. The construction
conveys a wealth of information to the
candlestick trader, which a regular line chart
reader would have no access to.
To illustrate this point and show the inherent
power of candlesticks, we will compare
Figure 2.8 with Figure 2.9. Both are charts of
Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd. for the same
time period.
Figure 2.8: Candlestick chart of Bharat
Heavy Electricals Ltd.
Figure 2.9: Line chart of Bharat Heavy
Electricals Ltd.
Can you visually see the vast difference in
the two charts? Here are some things which
can be easily observed:
Point A in the two charts shows a key
reversal for the share. What would havealerted a line chart trader to this reversal
(Figure 2.9)? Nothing. In the case of a
candlestick trader, a candlestick buy
formation would have been seen on Chart
2.8 and the trader could have acted on it.
Point B does not even exist in the line
chart (Figure 2.9). That is because a line
chart uses only closing prices. The
candlestick chart trader would have been
way ahead of the competition in this
case. It is easily seen from the chart
(Figure 2.8) that prices failed precisely
at the resistance level established in
early December. The supply at price
point B well exceeds the demand. The
candlestick trader could have used this
knowledge to go short.Point C in the line chart shows
oscillatory behaviour at an earlier
resistance level (Figure 2.9). However,
the strength of the stock cannot be
gleaned from the chart. Is it going to
break the resistance and go higher or
succumb to selling pressure? What do the
probabilities say? The answer is
uncertain at best. However, in the
candlestick chart (Figure 2.8), one can
easily observe the Doji and Spinning
Tops (explained later) confirming
resistance. The probabilities favoured
the bears.
To give an analogy, say a patient with a
broken bone walks into a doctor’s clinic.
The doctor can feel the affected area and tryto gauge the damage. But he cannot know
what is going on internally. He needs an x-
ray machine to visually show him the exact
location and extent of the damage.
Candlesticks perform the function of the
x-ray machine. They visually show you the
internal dynamics of the market. A simple
analysis of the candlestick chart would then
catapult you way ahead of your competition.Why Bother with Bar Charts?
We could also compare bar charts with
candle charts and come to almost the same
conclusion. The candlestick chart
incorporates everything that a bar chart does.
In addition, it is visually more revealing. The
black (red) and white (green) colour bodies
make analyzing a candlestick chart much
easier and more intuitive. Once you start
looking at candlestick charts, other charting
techniques seem dull and arcane. By the end
of this book, you should be able to analyze
any candlestick chart within a minute. That is
my goal.Stochastics
This book is written to help the reader
maximize his or her investment or trading
potential. One key ingredient of this strategy
is to minimize downside risk. For this
purpose, we will look for highly profitable
buy trades in oversold conditions and
highly profitable sell trades in overbought
conditions. To find out when the shares are
overbought or oversold, we need an
oscillator. I have always used the stochastics
oscillator for this purpose. It is a matter of
personal preference and the reader can
choose any other indicator he or she is
familiar with.
Note: For those readers who are unfamiliarwith technical indicators and oscillators, I
would recommend reading some of the
technical analysis books mentioned in the
Bibliography section of this book.
Note: The candlestick trader need not go into
details of the stochastics indicator. It is
described here for educational reading only.
The stochastic oscillator comprises of two
lines: %K, or the raw stochastics, and %D,
which is a moving average of the smoothed
version of %K.
The following formula is used to calculate
%K:
%K = (C – L) / (H – L) * 100Where,
C = Closing price.
L = Lowest price in last N days.
H = Highest price in last N days.
%K gives you a percentage between 0 and
100. From this formula, it can be seen that if
the stock is closing at the highest level in N
days, %K will be 100. This %K is generally
very volatile and hence is often smoothed out
over a certain number of days. This gives a
much smoother line than %K itself. %D is
the moving average over a certain number of
days of this smooth version of %K.
In short, stochastics give you the relative
position of the price as compared to therange of the past N trading days. If the
price closes towards the high end of the
period, then the stochastics will be closer to
100. If the price closes towards the lower
end of the range in that time period, then the
stochastics will be a number closer to 0. In
general, any reading above 80 for the
stochastics indicates an overbought
condition. Any reading below 20 suggests
that the shares are currently oversold.
The stochastics indicator can be plotted by
most of the charting software found online.
A question often arises as to what settings
should be used to display the stochastics. In
other words, what is the value of “N”
mentioned above? I usually use a value of12. Some traders use 14. The smaller the
time period you choose, the more volatile the
indicator will be. So, if you want to get rapid
buy and sell signals, you would choose, say,
5. For swing trading, where you hold a
position for a few days to a few weeks, you
could choose 12 or 14. The correct
procedure to get this number is by trial and
error. Your goal is to see where the price
reversed in the past and the corresponding
stochastic setting. Those need to match up.
The reversal from a high needs to match with
stochastics in overbought conditions while
the reversal from the bottom needs to match
with oversold conditions of stochastics.
The other parameter you put in is the number
of days to smooth out the %K. Generally, 3days works very well. But you are free to
experiment with other numbers.
It is vital to emphasize at this point that
the use of any indicator is secondary in
nature. The candlestick signals are the
primary source for decision making.
The key is to find candlestick buy signals in
oversold conditions and candlestick sell
signals in overbought conditions. As you
read the following chapters, you will notice
that most of the charts will focus on the
overbought-oversold conditions. For the
beginner candlestick trader, these situations
will be plentiful to take advantage of. They
will enhance your confidence level while
simultaneously increasing your portfolioreturns.
PART I
The first part of this book will focus on the
explanation of the major candlestick signals.
The nuances associated with individual
signal formations are explained along with
plenty of charts. Sometimes, you will see the
important points being repeated in many
places. Believe me, it will add to your
mental reinforcement of the psychology of
the signals. The goal here is to get your eyes
trained to the signal patterns to the point
where you instantly recognize and analyze
the underlying demand-supply equation in
that stock.
The following major signals will be coveredin depth:
The Doji.
The Hanging Man and the Hammer.
The Inverted Hammer and the Shooting
Star.
The Bullish Engulfing and Bearish
Engulfing signal.
The Dark Cloud and the Piercing signal.
The Harami.
The Morning Star and Evening Star
signals.
Please read and re-read these chapters
before going on to Part II of this book. Athorough understanding of the signal
formations is of the utmost importance if you
want to successfully trade with them.3
The Doji
The Doji is one of the most important
candlestick signals. The Japanese say that
whenever you see a Doji, pay heed.Doji
Description
Figure 3.1 shows a Doji formation. Notice
that the open and the close of the stock are at
about the same price.
Figure 3.1: Doji signalCriteria
For the Doji to be valid, the following
conditions need to be met:
The open and the close of the stock must
be almost at the same price level.
There can be an upper shadow or a
lower shadow, or both.
Figure 3.2 shows a few Doji variations:Figure 3.2: Doji variations
When the Doji does not have a lower
shadow, it is termed a Gravestone
Doji. The Japanese compare it to the
soldiers going out to battle during the day
and coming back to their original
positions for rest during the night. This
type of Doji formation is very
effective at the top of a trend. Thelogic being that though the bulls tried to
rally the stock they failed at the end of
the day.
A Doji without any upper shadow is
known as a Dragonfly Doji, just
because it looks like one. This kind of
Doji would have powerful implications
near the bottom of the trend. It implies
that while the bears tried to take the price
down during the day, by the end the bulls
were able to bring the price back to
where it had opened.
When the Doji has a small body, it is
also known as a Spinning Top.
Note: These names are mentioned here onlyfor information purposes. As a candlestick
trader, these names are irrelevant. The
analysis of the formation is critical. That
analysis will decide your survival in the
marketplace!
A Doji can be found anywhere in the trend.
The significance of the Doji varies according
to its position in the trend. A simple analysis
of Figure 3.1 indicates that the bulls tried to
drive the prices higher and failed. The bears
tried to run prices lower and failed. So there
is now equilibrium in demand and supply.
Both sides of the equation balance out each
other. The candlestick trader can use this
battle impasse very profitably.
We will now analyze the Doji in variousscenarios.
Doji After a Stock is in an Overbought
Condition
The Japanese say that whenever you see a
Doji at the top, be prepared to sell. Consider
a stock moving up in a trend. The bulls are
happy with the white candles increasing their
net worth. Then, one day, the candle forms a
Doji. The bulls were running unchecked till
now. Now the bears are starting to fight
back. They are fighting back to the point
where the bulls are not able to move the
price much higher from the open. This gives
rise to the Doji formation. The bulls are now
tired. The bears sense this. If the price opens
lower the next day, there is high probabilitythat the bulls have given in and the trend has
reversed for a while.
Doji After a Stock is in an Oversold
Condition
Now consider a stock that has been moving
down for a while. The bears are happy. The
black candles visually demonstrate their hold
on the stock. Then, one day, the bulls step in.
They fight the bears and finally the dayends
as a Doji. What does this do to the bears’
sentiment? They get nervous. They know they
are tired. If the next day the price stays
firmly positive, the bears move away. The
trend reverses as the bulls get more
confident.
Doji in a Sideways MarketConsider a stock moving sideways for a
period of time. The bulls and bears are
fighting it out. Then one day you notice a nice
big Doji. This is where things get interesting.
You now know that an equilibrium has been
achieved. What you want to see now is a gap
up or gap down scenario the next day. This
indicates high probability that a trend will
start in the direction of the gap. The reason
being, after the Doji (say in your mind
indecision), the traders have made up their
mind as to the stronger force between the
bulls and the bears. As a candlestick trader,
you can now enter this market to ride the new
trend.
The following conditions enhance the
probability of reversal:Stochastics in oversold or overbought
conditions.
Heavy volume on the Doji day.
Long upper and lower shadows implying
great indecision at the point.
A gap up or gap down open the next day.
Figure 3.3 shows a Doji stopping the
downtrend in Pfizer stock. You will notice
that Pfizer was already in an oversold
condition as indicated by the stochastics
position. What happened the day after the
Doji? A gap up bullish candle!Figure 3.3: Doji at key reversal levels in
Pfizer
The Doji told the candlestick trader to keep a
close watch. It indicated that the sellers, who
were so dominant till this point, were being
challenged by the bulls. There is indecision
in the market. There is, therefore, a goodprobability that the trend reversal is near.
However, there is need for confirmation
buying. The Japanese say that a Doji at
the top warrants immediate selling, but a
Doji at the bottom of a trend needs
confirmation of strength from the bulls.
This is because the weight of the market can
still drag the stock down if the bulls are not
forceful enough. Hence, one needs to wait to
see strength in the markets after a Doji type
day.
What better way to see strength then a gap up
bullish day as seen in Pfizer! The candlestick
trader should immediately act on this signal.
What signal do you see at the top of the
trend? A Doji!Examine the chart of Syndicate Bank in
Figure 3.4.
Figure 3.4: Doji formations in the chart of
Syndicate Bank
The early part of May (Point A) shows a
Doji type day stopping the downtrend. The
next day provided the confirmation thecandlestick trader would have needed to go
long. The rally lasted till mid-May, where a
Doji (Point B) ended the bullish run. Upon
going short after confirmation (yes, I wait for
confirmation even after a Doji at the top), the
trader would have again made a good profit.
The third arrow on the chart (Point C) shows
a spinning top and a Doji stopped the
pullback.
Figure 3.5 shows a chart of Hindalco. Notice
the arrows showing quite a few Doji. This is
why I like to see confirmation even for the
Doji at the top.Figure 3.5: Unconfirmed and confirmed
Doji in Hindalco
The first two Doji did not have any
confirmation selling following them. What
can be inferred from that? It shows that after
the up trend, the bulls merely rested. The day
of indecision was followed by more buying,
implying strength in the up trend. However,after the third Doji the bears assumed control
of the stock as seen by the big dark candle.
There was no doubt after seeing this candle
that the bulls had lost the battle.
Such analysis is what will distinguish you
from traders who are not aware of the
nuances of candlestick trading. It is not just a
matter of visually recognizing a signal. You
have to learn to analyze the signal in the
proper perspective. This book will help you
do that.
Let us conclude the discussion with Figure
3.6. The chart shows Hinduja stock rallying
after a Doji stopped its downtrend.Figure 3.6: A spinning top candle in
Hinduja
The candlestick trader would have entered
the position after the Doji was confirmed by
the next day’s buying. The ride from ` 305 to
about the ` 360 area would have generated
handsome profits. Where would the trader
have sold? Note the spinning top at the top ofthe trend. The trader would have sold after
the spinning top was confirmed by the dark
candle the day after.
4
Hammer and Hanging Man
Signals
The Hammer and the Hanging Man are one-
day reversal signals. Traders should gear up
to enter positions as soon as these signals get
confirmed the following day.
Hammer
Description
Figure 4.1 shows a Hammer formation. As
can be seen, an ideal Hammer has a small
body and a tail which is at least twice the
size of the candle’s body.
Figure 4.1: Hammer signalCriteria
In order for the Hammer signal to be valid,
the following conditions must exist:
The price must have been in a definite
downtrend before this signal occurs. This
can be visually seen on the chart.
The lower shadow must be at least twice
the size of the body.
The day after the Hammer is formed, one
should witness continued buying.
There should be no upper shadow or a
very small upper shadow. The colour of
the body does not matter, but a white
body would be more positive than ablack body.
Why the Reversal Works
Consider a stock moving down for a period
of time. Investors start panicking at some
point. They want to get out and accept the
loss. Finally, as the sellers pile on the stock
starts selling off heavily during the day. But
then smart money moves in. They are able to
move the price all the way near where the
stock had opened for that day. This gives the
stock a hammer look. The Japanese call it
hammering out a bottom. However, the
stock needs to trade higher the next day to
confirm that the bulls have actually reversed
the trend. The candlestick trader should enter
the market after seeing this confirmation.The following conditions can make the
Hammer signal a more compelling buy:
There is a gap down from the previous
day’s close on the day of the Hammer.
There is a spike in volume on the
Hammer day.
Stochastics are in oversold condition.
The longer the lower shadow, the better.
Figure 4.2 shows the chart of Bharat Forge
Co. Ltd. Notice the long-legged Hammer in
June 2006. The volume surged on the day of
the Hammer, indicating people were panic
selling the shares. The question is — who
was buying when these “novice” traders
were selling?Figure 4.2: A Hammer in oversold
condition in Bharat Forge
Also note the fact that the stochastics were
near the oversold area. Another point to see
in the chart is the day before the Hammer
signal. That candle also had a long tail,
indicating buyers stepping in to absorb someof the selling. But it did not form the Hammer
signal because the lower shadow was not
twice the length of the body.
Consider Figure 4.3 showing the Hammer
formation in Punjab National Bank chart. If
you watch closely, the Hammer has a small
upper shadow. That is acceptable. Compared
to the size of the lower shadow, the upper
shadow is negligible. The stochastics are in
the right place adding credence to the signal.
Buying around the ` 430 area after
confirmation and selling around the ` 470
area (after the Bearish Engulfing signal)
would have given the candlestick trader
good profits.Figure 4.3: Punjab National Bank rallying
after a Hammer
Figure 4.4 shows a Hammer signal in Biocon
Limited. Notice the stochastics were not in
the oversold region, but were moving up.
This was due to the price steadying around
the ` 330 area. What can be deduced fromthis chart is that the investors lost patience
with the stock. After weeks of downtrend,
and then no movement at all, the investors
finally gave up. That was the time smart
money moved in and generated the classic
Hammer signal. Strong profits would have
been generated for a trader buying on
confirmation of this signal.Figure 4.4: A Hammer and volume
explosion in Biocon
What do the candlesticks in Figure 4.5 show
you? Can you see any sign before the actual
Hammer signal that should have alerted you
that the downtrend might be approaching its
end? The big black candle the day before theHammer in oversold condition shows you
visually the panic selling as a result of the
fear experienced by novice traders.
Remember, from now on, you are trading
fear and greed, not stocks. That is what the
market is all about — and successful traders
take advantage of that everyday.
Figure 4.5: A Hammer in oversold
condition in Hindustan Lever
We will conclude the Hammer discussion
with the chart of ABB in Figure 4.6. By now,
hopefully, I have drilled into your psyche the
conditions you need to be looking for when
trading the Hammer signal. So, go ahead and
analyze this chart for yourself. Candlestick
signals are very simple if you know exactly
what you are looking for.Figure 4.6: A Hammer confirming
previous support in ABBHanging Man
Description
Figure 4.7 shows a visual depiction of the
Hanging Man signal. No, I have not copied
the image from Figure 4.1 showing the
Hammer. Please notice the difference in the
two images. The formation of the signal is
exactly the same, but the position of the
signal in the trend has changed. The
Hammer comes after a downtrend and the
Hanging Man comes after an up trend.Figure 4.7: Hanging Man signalCriteria
The conditions for the Hanging Man signal to
be valid are:
The stock must have been in a definite up
trend before this signal occurs. This can
be visually verified on the chart.
The lower shadow must be at least twice
the size of the body.
The day after the Hanging Man signal
should witness continued selling and a
lower close.
There should be no upper shadow or a
very small upper shadow.Why the Reversal Works
Consider a stock in an up trend. Investors
and traders are happy that their portfolios are
showing green. Then, one day, big money
decides to take profits. They start selling the
stock. Novice traders, who have seen the
stock rise for the past numerous sessions, see
this dip as a buying opportunity. They start
absorbing the supply and are finally able to
take the price up towards the top of the day’s
trading range. However, the bulls are now
getting nervous. Their confidence in the stock
is dropping. Their greed is turning into fear
— fear of losing their hard earned profits. If
the stock closes lower the next day
confirming their fears, the downtrend will
accelerate from that point on. The bears willtake control.
The following conditions make the reversal
of the up trend more convincing:
There is a spike in volume on the day of
the signal.
There is a gap up from the previous close
on the day of the signal showing
exuberant buying at the top.
Stochastics are in overbought condition.
The longer the lower shadow, the better.
The colour of the Hanging Man body
does not matter, but a black body would
be a stronger confirmation.
Figure 4.8 shows the chart of SatyamComputer Services Ltd. This is an ideal
Hanging Man signal. All the stars have
aligned for the trader to take on the short side
of the trade. Those who are averse to
shorting stocks can at least sell their existing
position and lock-in profits.
Figure 4.8: A Hanging Man in overboughtcondition in Satyam Computer
Firstly, you can see the climactic buying as
shown by the above average volume on the
day before the signal. Secondly, stochastics
are in the overbought area. The day after the
Hanging Man signal, the stock gapped down,
validating the fact that bears had taken
control.
Notice in the chart of Punjab Tractors Ltd. in
Figure 4.9, that the stock gapped up on the
day it formed the Hanging Man signal.Figure 4.9: Hanging Man stops the up
trend in Punjab Tractors
Though it was a relatively small candle, it
satisfied all the requirements of the
formation. Also notice that this signal was
formed at the same area where the stock met
resistance a few days back. This type ofconfirmation should give a trader a high
degree of confidence that the trend is
reversing.
What can we see in Figure 4.10? Can you
glean any information as a trader from the
candle the day before the Hanging Man
signal formed?Figure 4.10: Hanging Man confirms
spinning top in Jaiprakash Associates
That particular day visually depicts the battle
between bulls and bears. The bears finally
took control with the Hanging Man
formation, which was confirmed the
following day with a lower close.After going through these charts and getting
familiar with the Hammer and Hanging Man
signals, think and analyse in your mind the
signal formation day. This will reinforce
your confidence as you will now know the
reasoning behind your trade. Traders can
only be so much successful if they don’t
understand their trades. Eventually, their
losses will mount more than their profits.
Understanding candlestick signals will give
a big boost to your confidence and help you
pull the trigger at the right place and at the
right time.
5
Inverted Hammer and Shooting
Star Signals
The Inverted Hammer and the Shooting Star
signal also belong to the class of one-day
reversal signals. We will basically flip the
Hammer and the Hanging Man signals upside
down to generate these new signals.Inverted Hammer
Description
Figure 5.1 shows the Inverted Hammer
formation.
Figure 5.1: Inverted Hammer signal
As you can see from the directions of the
arrows, the Inverted Hammer is found near
the bottom of a downtrend.Criteria
In order for the Inverted Hammer signal to be
valid, the following conditions must exist:
The stock must have been in a definite
downtrend before this signal occurs. This
can be visually seen on the chart.
The upper shadow must be at least twice
the size of the length of the body.
The day following the Inverted Hammer
should witness continued buying.
There should either be no lower shadow
or a very small lower shadow. The
colour of the body does not matter, but a
white body would be more positive thana black body.
Why the Reversal Works
Imagine a stock in a downtrend. As
portfolios start showing red, there is panic in
the street. People want to get out. That is the
time smart money likes to buy. One day, as
the stock opens down or flat, the bulls start
stepping in. They drive the price higher
during the day. Eventually, the bears drive it
back down and close it near the open of the
day. The bulls have, however, shown their
presence. They can now sense that the bears
are getting weaker. If the bulls manage to
close the price higher the next day, the
downtrend is considered broken. The key
here, as was in the case of the Hammer, isthat the bulls need to show confirmed buying
the next day. Again, the Japanese candlestick
traders have placed emphasis on the fact that
the upper shadow must be at least twice that
of the body size. The colour of the body does
not matter, though a white body would be
ideal. That would demonstrate the bulls
managed to close the price higher than where
the stock had opened up.
The following conditions can make the
Inverted Hammer signal a more compelling
buy:
There is a gap down from the previous
day’s close on the day the Inverted
Hammer is formed.
There is a spike in volume on theInverted Hammer day.
Stochastics are in oversold condition.
The longer the upper shadow, the more
the dominance shown by the bulls.
Figure 5.2 shows the chart of Prism Cement.Figure 5.2: Gap down Inverted Hammer in
Prism Cement
What a perfect visual depiction of panic
selling! The gap down on the day of the
Inverted Hammer in oversold conditions
should immediately alert the trader for a
possible trend reversal. The correct entryprocedure would be to wait for confirmation
of buying the next day, which in this case
was pretty evident.
Figure 5.3 again shows the Prism Cement
chart, this time focusing in the June 2006
period.
Figure 5.3: Inverted Hammer in Prism
Cement
We witness a gap down Inverted Hammer in
oversold conditions. What should the
candlestick traders do here? They should
wait for confirmation. The next day the
buying was confirmed as shown by the white
candle. The traders are now ready to pull the
trigger. What happens then is very interesting
and worth elaborating. The day after the
confirmation, the price gaps up. Many
traders will now hesitate to jump in the
market. Their rationale being, is it worth it to
buy the stock after it has now gapped up?
Have I lost my buy point?
The key to remember is “buy strength and
sell weakness”. What the market hasessentially shown you is strength. Listen to
the market. The market is never wrong!
Figure 5.4 shows an Inverted Hammer in Dr.
Reddy’s Laboratories chart.
Figure 5.4: An Inverted Hammer proved
very effective in Dr Reddy’sNotice the massive selling for three days in a
row before the Inverted Hammer. With
Stochastics in oversold conditions and
confirmation buying on the following day, the
market was offering a high probability
reversal scenario to the trader. You can also
notice an Inverted Hammer like formation in
the chart in September. The upper shadow
was not quite twice the body size.
Stochastics were not in oversold conditions
either. It proved to be a good reversal, but
it was not a candlestick signal. The trader
would be well advised not to chase these
“almost” candlestick formations. There are
hundreds of pure candlestick signals being
formed every day. They have been tested
thoroughly for centuries. Take advantage of
them. Do not unnecessarily put your hardearned money in trying to reinvent the wheel.
We will conclude the Inverted Hammer
discussion with Figure 5.5, showing the chart
of Tata Power Co. Ltd.
Figure 5.5: An Inverted Hammer starts
the next leg up in Tata PowerWhat can you observe before the downtrend
reversed? You can see there was a Hammer.
Would you buy the day after the Hammer?
No. If you said yes, you might want to re-
read the previous chapter. To be a true
reversal, the Hammer signal needs
confirmation. In this case there was none.
However, the Hammer was followed by an
Inverted Hammer. The day after that was a
Doji day, where price closed higher and
confirmed the presence of the bulls. I would
probably have bought after prices gapped up
following the Doji day.
Here, again, the market was giving strong
signals to the trader who was tuning in. It
gave him a Hammer, then followed that with
an Inverted Hammer, then followed that witha Doji, and then a gap up. All these signals
were suggesting that the bulls were coming
into the stock. Learn to analyze these
formations and the market will reward you.Shooting Star
Description
Figure 5.6 shows a visual depiction of the
Shooting Star signal.
Figure 5.6: Shooting Star signal
It is formed after a stock has been in adefined up trend. The formation looks like a
shooting star with its tail pointing to the sky,
hence the name.Criteria
The conditions for the Shooting Star signal to
be valid are:
The stock must have been in a definite up
trend before this signal occurs. This can
be visually verified on the chart.
The upper shadow must be at least twice
the size of the body.
The day after the Shooting Star signal
should witness continued selling and a
lower close.
There should be no lower shadow or
very small lower shadow.Why the Reversal Works
Consider a stock in an up trend. When do
most novice investors tend to buy? Right at
the top! After a stock has gone up, they
convince themselves that it will keep going
up. Exuberance sets in. One day, as the stock
opens higher or relatively flat, the investors
jump in and create a huge white candle
during the day. Smart money starts selling
noticing the greed in the stock. The selling
brings the price down, creating a long upper
shadow. If the stock closes lower the day
after the Shooting Star, the trend is said to be
reversed.
The following conditions make the reversal
of the up trend more convincing:There is a spike in volume on the day of
the signal.
There is a gap up from the previous close
on the day of the signal, indicating
exuberant buying at the top.
Stochastics are in overbought condition.
The longer the upper shadow, the better.
The colour of the Shooting Star body
does not matter, but a black body would
be a stronger confirmation.
Figure 5.7 shows a Shooting Star formation
in the Tata Teleservices chart.Figure 5.7: Shooting Star in Tata
Teleservices starts its downtrend
The Shooting Star formation in overbought
conditions and with above average volume
gives a candlestick trader the perfect
opportunity to enter into a short side trade.
When would a trader enter the market in thiscase?
Keep in mind that you are always looking for
confirmation of the candlestick signal. This
was provided by the bears the following day
by closing the price below the low of the
Shooting Star. The trader would have been
handsomely rewarded for his chart analyzing
talents in this case.
Figure 5.8 shows a Shooting Star formation
in Dr. Reddy’s Laboratories chart.Figure 5.8: Dr. Reddy’s heads south after a
Shooting Star signal
This was a perfect Shooting Star followed
by confirmed selling the next day. The
stochastics turned down, also confirming the
start of the downtrend.Notice the chart in Figure 5.9 showing an
imperfect Shooting Star formation in Nocil.
Figure 5.9: Bulls fail to hold on after the
Shooting Star signal in Nocil
There is a tiny lower shadow in that
Shooting Star. Given the size of the upper
shadow, that length of lower shadow is
acceptable. Notice the Shooting Star did notconfirm the next day as it was a Doji /
Spinning Top. Correct entry point would be
to enter the short trade after these signals got
confirmed to the downside with a bearish
candle.
We have now covered the major one-day
reversal signals. The important point to
remember about them is to wait for
confirmation. In the next couple of chapters
we will focus on and analyze the major two-
day candlestick reversal patterns.6
Engulfing Signals
There are two types of engulfing signals
defined by candlestick formations. These
belong to the two-day reversal patterns. We
will first look at Bullish Engulfing pattern.Bullish Engulfing
Description
Figure 6.1 shows a classic Bullish Engulfing
signal.
Figure 6.1: Bullish Engulfing signal
The signal is formed when a subsequentwhite body completely engulfs the previous
black body.Criteria
In order for the bullish engulfing signal to be
valid, the following conditions must exist:
The stock must have been in a definite
downtrend before this signal occurs. This
can be visually seen on the chart.
The second day of the signal should be
white and the body should completely
engulf the previous day’s black candle
body. Even if the first day is a Doji
(described in Chapter 3), it is still a
bullish engulfing signal.
Why the Reversal WorksConsider a stock which has been steadily
moving down. The investors in the stock are
getting nervous when they see red on their
screen day after day. They hope the stock
will somehow turn around. After days of
continued anguish, the investors cannot take
it anymore. They now convince themselves
to get out of the stock. Where do most
investors sell? At the bottom! This creates
the long dark candle of the first day. Because
of the huge selling pressure, the stock gaps
down on the open the second day, below the
close of the previous day. But now smart
money moves in. The supply is absorbed by
the demand. The stock finally closes above
the open of the previous day, thus creating
the white engulfing candle. The bulls have
now taken over. The bulls have showntremendous strength, which does not go
unnoticed by the bears. The trend has a high
probability of reversing at this point.
Strong as the signal is in itself, the following
conditions make it more probable that the
trend has reversed:
The first day’s dark candle body is very
long compared to other candles in the
current downtrend.
There is a spike in volume on either of
the two signal days.
The first dark candle has gapped down
from the previous trend. This shows the
desperate need for the remaining panic
sellers to get out of the stock.Stochastics are in oversold condition.
The second day’s white body engulfs
more than one black candle from the
previous trend.
Figure 6.2 shows a chart of Essar Oil.
Notice the stock gapped down two days
prior to the big white engulfing candle. Also
notice that the white candle engulfed the two
prior black candles, lending significant force
to the reversal. As a trader, this is what you
want to buy into. Remember, always buy into
strength.Figure 6.2: Bullish Engulfing signal in
oversold condition in Essar Oil
Notice in Figure 6.3 how India Cement
reverses the down trend for a very profitable
trade after a bullish engulfing signal.Figure 6.3: India Cement exhibiting a gap
up after forming a Bullish Engulfing signal
Observe the large black candle showing
panic selling by amateur investors. Smart
money moves in the next day to readily take
the stock from the panicky sellers. The up
tick in volume also confirms the reversal. Asa trade, the probabilities are extremely high
that the trend is now reversed. The bulls
have stolen the thunder from the bears.
What should a buyer look for after any
bullish reversal signal? More buying! This
sounds like a simple answer and the fact of
the matter is that it is. However, most
investors and traders do not use this simple
logic. The buyer should await some
confirmation that the bulls are still in control
of the stock. It is not uncommon to see some
residual selling after a big bullish engulfing
candle. Those sellers who had held on
through the panic selling finally sell out after
seeing the price higher than the last couple of
days. For confirmation that he needs the
buyer should make sure from the chart thatsuch selling is not heavy.
Figure 6.4 shows a classic Bullish Engulfing
signal. The stochastics are in oversold
condition and the big white candle day is
accompanied by a spike in volume. As a
trader, the correct strategy is buying on
confirmation the following day.
Figure 6.4: Bullish Engulfing signal withheavy volume indicates possible trend
reversal
Finally, Figure 6.5 shows IPCL reversing its
downtrend after a small bullish engulfing
signal. Even though the engulfing candle is
very small, it is still a bullish engulfing
signal. The reader can also observe another
bullish engulfing signal in the chart in late
September which starts the next phase in the
up trend.Figure 6.5: Bullish Engulfing signal
reversing IPCL’s downtrendBearish Engulfing
Description
Figure 6.6 shows a classic Bearish Engulfing
signal. As is seen, the signal is formed when
a dark body completely engulfs a white body.
Figure 6.6: Bearish Engulfing signalCriteria
In order for the bearish engulfing signal to be
valid, the following conditions must exist:
The stock must have been in a definite up
trend before this signal occurs. This can
be visually verified on the chart.
The second day of the signal should be
black and the body should completely
engulf the previous day’s white candle
body. Even if the first day is a Doji, it is
still a Bearish Engulfing signal.
Why the Reversal Works
Consider a stock which has been steadilymoving up. The investors in the stock are
growing exuberant by the day they see the
stock go up. The bulls are happy and relaxed.
After days of continued up trend, the amateur
investors finally convince themselves of
buying into the stock. They cannot bear to
watch its price go up and not participate in
it. Again, where do most investors buy? At
the top!
This creates the long white candle of the first
day. The pent up demand makes the stock gap
up the next day. But now the smart money is
selling into the final rally. The demand of the
novice investors is constantly filled by the
supply from experienced traders. The stock
finally closes below the open of the previous
day, thus creating the dark engulfing candle.The bears have now taken over. The trend
has a high possibility of reversal.
Strong as the signal is by itself, the following
conditions make it more convincing:
The first day’s white candle body is very
long compared to the rest of the trading
range.
There is a spike in volume on either of
the two signal days.
The first white candle has gapped up
from the previous trend. This shows the
desperate need of the novice investors to
get into the stock.
Stochastics are in overbought condition.
The second day’s dark body engulfs morethan one white candle from the previous
trend.
Figure 6.7 shows another Bearish Engulfing
signal.
Figure 6.7: Bearish Engulfing signal near
overbought conditions in HindustanMotors
As you can see, candlestick charting clearly
depicts investor sentiment changing in the
stock. A candlestick trader could have long
seen the deterioration in the health of this
stock before the bearish engulfing signal
finally broke it down.
Figure 6.8 clearly reveals the exuberance of
the novice investors buying into the top of the
trend.Figure 6.8: ITI Ltd. showing Bearish
Engulfing signals after exuberant buying
How often do we get caught in this situation?
When the stock rallied from below ` 30, the
novice investor wanted to wait to see if this
was a good stock. The investor was finally
convinced that this stock deserves his or hermoney somewhere in the ` 70 range. Finally,
when it looks like everybody in the
neighbourhood is buying in the stock, the
novice jumps in. This is the last panic
buying. Smart money then starts selling to the
inexperienced investors.
JCT Ltd shows a Bearish Engulfing pattern
in Figure 6.9.Figure 6.9: Bearish Engulfing signal in
JCT Ltd.
Notice the gap up in overbought condition
forming the white candle. The volume
expanded showing a lot of shares changing
hands. Finally, the bearish dark candle
completed the pattern. What should a trader
see after the Bearish Engulfing pattern? Moreselling!
The candlestick signals have been tested
through 400 years of trading. They signify a
high degree of probability that the trend is
about to reverse. The trader should always
keep this in mind. This will help build
confidence while actually placing a trade.
In the case of Manali Petro in Figure 6.10,
one can visually observe the climactic
buying in the stock.Figure 6.10: Manali Petro’s Bearish
Engulfing signal produces quick profits
Stochastics near the overbought area should
have alerted the astute trader that exuberant
buying was taking place. All the trader needs
now is to patiently wait for the sell signal.
On completion of the bearish engulfing
signal, the trader should either sell his or hershares or employ any number of other
bearish strategies. Another high probability
scenario to be taken advantage of!
Figure 6.11 shows the Nifty index reversing
its up trend after a bearish engulfing signal.
Figure 6.11: A Bearish Engulfing signaltakes down the Nifty
Stochastics indicated that the index was in an
overbought condition. This created a high
probability situation for trend reversal. If
you do not want to trade the index itself, you
can find stocks which are exhibiting sell
signals at this time. With the market index
showing a bearish engulfing pattern, there is
a high probability that the component stocks
with a bearish reversal signal will make for
a profitable trade to the downside.
Candlestick signals are universal. They can
be applied to indexes as well.
Exceptions
There is one unique set-up that sometimesoccurs the trend of bullish and bearish
engulfing patterns, which can be summarized
as follows.
If a bullish engulfing signal occurs when
the stock is in an overbought condition,
then the signal has bearish implications.
This is usually referred to as last-gasp
buying. The novice investors seeing the
price gap down are thrilled to get into the
stock. Their enthusiasm drives the stock
price higher for the day causing the bullish
engulfing pattern. Unfortunately, the smart
money is selling their stock. The trader must
now be alert for signs that the trend is about
to turn down.
Let us analyse the chart of NagarjunaFertiliser and Chemicals Ltd (Figure 6.12),
for the three days starting May 11th.
Figure 6.12: Bullish engulfing signal in
overbought conditions is not a buy
scenario
The stock had a bearish engulfing signal on
May 11th. The trader should now be on
guard to take profits if the signal isconfirmed.
On May 12th, the stock opened lower, but
then immediately headed higher. This is not
what you want to see after a bearish
engulfing signal. By the end of the day, it had
formed a bullish engulfing signal. The trader
should now start expecting a sell signal
anytime, knowing the reasoning behind this
phenomenon.
The very next day witnessed a bearish
engulfing signal, which was confirmed the
day after by more selling.
Proper use of candlestick signals can lead to
highly profitable trades. It helps the trader’s
confidence immensely if he also understandsthe psychology behind the signals.
If a bearish engulfing signal is witnessed in
an oversold condition, then the
implications of such a signal are bullish.
Take a moment to visualize what is going on
in such a case. After an extended downtrend,
smart money has started buying. This
pressure causes prices to gap up. The novice
investors, looking to take advantage of the
higher prices on the open, start selling
causing the temporary bearish engulfing
pattern. Most of the times the smart money is
strong enough to turn the tide in the reverse
direction.
Candlestick signals have stood the test of
time and made huge fortunes for those whohave correctly utilized them. Learn to read
and analyse the chart day by day. Always
keep in mind the following two simple facts:
If you witness a candlestick sell signal in
overbought condition, it has to be
followed by more selling to prove that
the sellers are still around.
If you witness a candlestick buy signal in
oversold condition, it has to be followed
by more buying to confirm that the buyers
are forceful enough to turn the trend.
Simple as these facts may seem, they can
make or break a trader!7
Dark Cloud and Piercing
Signals
This chapter will describe in detail the
nuances of trading the Dark Cloud signal and
the Piercing signal. These also belong to the
class of two-day reversal signals. They are
sort of like a “semi” completed version of
the Bearish Engulfing and the Bullish
Engulfing signal, respectively.Piercing Signal
Description
Figure 7.1 shows a classic Piercing Signal.
As you can see, the signal is formed when a
white coloured body opens below the low of
the previous day’s trading range and closes
above the half-way point of that dark body.Figure 7.1: Piercing SignalCriteria
In order for the piercing signal to be valid,
the following conditions must exist:
The stock must have been in a definite
downtrend before this signal occurs. This
can be visually seen on the chart.
The second day of the signal should be a
white candle opening below the trading
range of the previous day and closing at
least half way into the body of the
previous day’s dark candle.
Why the Reversal Works
Let us say stock XYZ is moving downsteadily. There comes a time when investors
who are suffering losses in that stock begin
doubting themselves. They start getting
emotionally drained looking at their
portfolios every day. Finally, they give up.
Usually there is a climactic sell-off in the
stock. Next day the stock gaps down and
smart money pours in. The supply of shares
is snapped up by the demand. The stock
starts rising and finally closes up for the day
creating the white candle body. Now, the
Japanese give great importance to the
number 2. They have found over centuries of
trading that if the bulls can manage to close
the second day’s candle more than half way
up the previous black candle, that puts the
probabilities greatly in their favour that they
have reversed the trend.The existence of the following conditions
makes the trend reversal more convincing:
The first day’s dark candle body is very
long compared to the rest of the trading
range.
There is a spike in volume on either of
the two signal days.
The first dark candle has gapped down
from the previous trend. This shows the
desperate need for the last of panic
sellers to get out of the stock.
Stochastics are in oversold condition.
The second day’s white body opens way
below the trading range of the previous
day.Figure 7.2 shows a chart of Essar Oil.
Notice how the trend reversed with a
piercing signal. Also observe that the
stochastics were in the oversold region,
giving that much more weight to the
probability of this happening.
Figure 7.2: Piercing signal in oversoldconditions in Essar Oil
Observe the chart of GE Shipping in Figure
7.3.
Figure 7.3: Start of an up trend after a
Piercing signal in GE Shipping
The first day of the pattern was a gap downdark bodied candle. Given the fact that the
stochastics are in oversold condition, this
was a clue for any trader to watch closely
for a trend reversal sign. The trader at this
point should visually be imagining the panic
most investors are going through and should
be ready to act at the first signs of smart
money moving in. That sign was given the
next day with a piercing signal.
Figure 7.4 shows how the bulls reversed the
downtrend with a Piercing signal.Figure 7.4: Mahindra and Mahindra going
up after a huge Piercing candle
Notice that in this case the stochastics were
not in the ideal oversold conditions.
However, one should remember that the
candlestick signal is the primary factor. The
oscillators are secondary factors. Though theprobabilities are higher for a trend reversing
when the signal is formed in the oversold
area, the trader should not neglect these
opportunities. This is especially true in
strong trending markets when the position
never pulls back enough to get oversold.
Figure 7.5 shows the chart of Rolta India
Ltd. in the early part of June 2006.Figure 7.5: Rolta reverses its downtrend
after panic selling is followed by a Piercing
signal
By now you are well trained to recognize the
Piercing signal. But look at the days
preceding that signal. The dark coloured
bodies are getting larger. Aren’t theyshouting “panic!”?Dark Cloud Cover
Description
Figure 7.6 shows a Dark Cloud Cover
signal. As can be seen, the signal is formed
when a dark coloured body opens above the
previous day’s trading range and closes more
than half way into the white coloured body.Figure 7.6: Dark Cloud Cover signalCriteria
In order for the Dark Cloud Cover signal to
be valid, the following conditions must exist:
The stock must have been in a definite up
trend before this signal occurs. This can
be visually verified on the chart.
On the second day of the signal, the
candle should open above the previous
white coloured body’s trading range and
close more than half way into it, thus
forming a black body.
Why the Reversal WorksConsider a stock moving up. Things are rosy
and investors are happy. Then one day the
exuberance sets in forming a good sized
white candle. The next day the price gaps up
and smart money starts selling the stock to
novice traders. The selling overwhelms the
buying and finally the candle closes more
than half way into the previous white candle.
As in the case of the Piercing pattern, the
important thing to notice is that the dark
candle closes deeply, at least half way, into
the previous candle.
The following conditions make it more
convincing that the trend has reversed:
The first day’s white candle body is very
long compared to the recent tradingrange.
There is a spike in volume on either of
the two signal days.
The first white candle has gapped up
from the previous trend. This shows the
exuberance of novice traders.
Stochastics are in an overbought
condition.
The second day’s dark candle opens way
above the previous day’s trading range.
Figure 7.7 shows a Dark Cloud Cover signal
in the chart of Allahabad Bank.Figure 7.7: Dark Cloud Cover signal in
overbought conditions in Allahabad Bank
A huge surge in buying can be seen from the
volume on the day before the Dark Cloud
signal. Notice that conditions were already
overbought as indicated by the stochastics.
Figure 7.8 shows the chart of Aegis LogisticsLtd.
Figure 7.8: Aegis Logistics drops like a
rock following a Dark Cloud signal
The stock had run up from ` 230 level to the `
300 area. The bulls were getting excited.
They gapped the prices higher, but could not
sustain the momentum. Notice the climacticvolume surge. What followed the Dark
Cloud Cover was almost a 180 point drop.
Look at the chart in Figure 7.9. Try to
analyze it from a technical trader’s
perspective.
Figure 7.9: Dark Cloud Cover signalconfirming previous resistance in SAIL
Can you see the Dark Cloud Cover signal?
Now trace back an imaginary horizontal line
to the month of May and notice another
candlestick signal (Hint: see previous
chapter). This is a trader’s delight. When one
signal corroborates another signal at a
previous resistance point, the probabilities
are extremely high that the trend has
reversed. Chapter 10 will go in detail about
using support / resistance lines.
Figure 7.10 shows another Dark Cloud
Cover.Figure 7.10: Dark Cloud Cover in Birla
VXL
In May 2005, all the ideal conditions had
lined up for a trend reversal in Birla VXL:
Stochastics in overbought condition;
There was exuberant buying asrepresented by large bodied candles;
Dark Cloud Cover signal.
As a candlestick trader, you are now seeing
the market as a game of greed and fear. You
are visually training your eyes to detect the
panic and exuberance of other novice
traders. Let me emphasize again the fact that
these signals have been tested for about four
hundred years by the Japanese. Have
confidence in them.
8
The Harami
The Harami is another potent two-day
reversal signal. The Japanese have named it
Harami because of the way the signals looks,
as though depicting a pregnant women with
her belly sticking out.
The Harami occurring in an up trend
implies that the buying has stopped.
Likewise, a Harami occurring in a
downtrend indicates that the selling has
stopped. As in the case of the one-day
reversal signals, it is best to wait forconfirmation the next day before taking on
any position.Bullish Harami
Description
Figure 8.1 shows a Bullish Harami
formation. The bigger engulfing candle is
black or dark in colour and the subsequent
smaller engulfed candle is white or light in
colour. It is not necessary for the tails of the
smaller candle to be engulfed by the
previous candle.Figure 8.1: Bullish Harami signalCriteria
In order for the bullish Harami signal to be
valid, the following conditions must exist:
The stock must have been in a definite
downtrend before this signal occurs. This
can be visually seen on the chart.
The second day of the signal should be
white and the body should be completely
engulfed by the previous day’s black
candle body.
Why the Reversal Works
Consider a stock trending down. As usual,
the novice investors and traders panic at thebottom creating the long black candle.
However, due to some news or change in
perception after trading hours, demand gets
generated for the stock. The next day the
stock gaps up and smart money starts sapping
up the supply. The bulls are able to close the
candle towards the upper range of the
previous day. This makes the bears nervous.
Those who have shorted the stock in the hope
that it will keep going down are now having
second thoughts. They are waiting to see
what happens the next day. If the bulls are
still in the stock the next day, those with short
positions begin to cover their positions, thus
giving the stock more impetus in the upward
direction. The bulls get more confident and
the up trend begins.The following conditions can make the
Bullish Harami signal a more compelling
buy:
The longer the black engulfing candle
and the white engulfed candle, the higher
the chance that the trend will be
reversed.
There is heavy volume on either of the
two days of the signal formation.
Stochastics are in an oversold condition.
The higher the white candle closes into
the black candle body, the higher the
probability of reversal.Bearish Harami
Description
Figure 8.2 shows a Bearish Harami
formation. The bigger engulfing candle is
white or light in colour and the following
smaller engulfed candle is dark or black in
colour. It is not necessary for the tails of the
smaller candle to be engulfed by the
previous candle.Figure 8.2: Bearish Harami signalCriteria
In order for the Bearish Harami signal to be
valid, the following conditions must exist:
The stock must have been in a definite up
trend before this signal occurs. This can
be visually seen on the chart.
The second day of the signal should be
black and the body should be completely
engulfed by the previous day’s white
candle body.
Why the Reversal Works
Consider a stock trending up. As is most
often the case, the novice investors andtraders buy exuberantly at the top creating the
long white candle. However, due to some
news or change in perception after market
hours, the stock becomes less desirable to
own. The next day the stock gaps down and
smart money starts selling. The bears are
able to close the candle down towards the
lower range of the previous day. This makes
the bulls nervous. Those who have recently
bought the stock in the hope that it will keep
going up are now on the edge. They are
waiting to see what happens the next day. If
the bears are still in the stock the next day,
the selling continues and the stock starts
heading lower. Those with recent long
positions start selling to get out with a small
loss and along with the bears shorting, the
stock tumbles down.The following conditions can make the
Bearish Harami signal more compelling to
short:
The longer the white engulfing candle
and the black engulfed candle, the higher
the chance that the trend will be
reversed.
There is heavy volume on either of the
two days of the signal formation.
Stochastics are in an overbought
condition.
The deeper the black candle closes into
the white candle body, the higher the
probability of reversal.
You will notice on some of the charts that thesecond day of the signal (the engulfed
candle) is one of the one-day reversal
signals. In cases of a Bearish Harami, it
could be a Hanging Man or a Shooting Star,
or even a Doji.
Conversely, in cases of a Bullish Harami, it
could be a Hammer or an Inverted Hammer
or a Doji. This adds weight to the fact that
reversal is about to happen. When you see
more than one candlestick signal at any point
in a trend indicating that a trend reversal is
possible, take notice immediately!
Figure 8.3 shows a Bullish Harami formation
in Hindustan Motors.Figure 8.3: Bullish Harami in Hindustan
Motors starts its up trend
Notice how the price gapped up the day after
the Harami signal formed. What does this tell
you as a candlestick trader? It tells you that
other investors want to get into this stock in a
hurry. After the downtrend, something has
changed the perception towards the stock.Maybe it was a good earnings report or a
huge contract gain. As a trader, it is
immaterial to find out what the news was that
changed the perception. It is always helpful
to know, but not necessary. As a trader, you
are more concerned about the strength of the
new upturn. Seeing the gap up should give
you the required confidence that there is a
strong force behind the up move. Time to
jump in!
Figure 8.4 shows the chart of IPCL.Figure 8.4: Confirmed Bullish Harami
reverses downtrend in IPCL
Notice the two arrows marked in the
downtrend. Both are pointing to Harami
formations. You can see that the selling
continued after the first Harami had formed.
The second Harami stopped the selling and a
new upturn was initiated. The question to askyourself is — should you have considered
buying after the first Harami? I would not.
Why? Because there was no confirmation
buying the day after the signal was formed. In
fact prices gapped down after this Harami.
This is not what you would expect after a
candlestick buy signal. Stochastics were still
heading down, too. How about the second
Harami? Prices gapped up after this Harami
and closed higher. Stochastics were oversold
by this time, thus creating a high probability
reversal situation.
This is not to say that all signals that get
confirmed will result in a profitable trade.
We will get into the signal failure scenarios
in Chapter 11. This example was just to
show you that analyzing the signals andunderstanding the nuances can avoid a lot of
bad trades. This does two things, it helps
preserve your capital and, more importantly,
it helps keep your trading confidence high.
The chart of the Nifty index is shown in
Figure 8.5.
Figure 8.5: Bullish and Bearish Harami in
Nifty
Notice the chart at point A. This formation
looks like the Harami, but it actually is not.
Nifty opened a point higher than where it had
closed the day before. This does not satisfy
the conditions needed for the Harami
formation. Point B is a Bearish Harami.
Nifty opened exactly where it had closed the
night before. This is acceptable and satisfies
the criteria of engulfment. Point C is a
Bullish Harami. This stopped the pullback of
the Nifty and was a precursor to a huge run
up of the index.
Figure 8.6 shows a Bullish Harami in the
chart of Tata Tea. Notice the long dark
candle in oversold conditions. This shouldhave been the trader’s first alert. He should
have been on the lookout for a buy signal
from then on. The next day a Harami was
formed. The trader should then have
analyzed the Harami formation. Look at the
long lower shadow. The bears tried to take
control on that day, but failed.
Figure 8.6: Bullish Harami in upper region
of a previous body is a very powerful buy
signal
The bulls had not only managed to gap up the
price from the previous close, but also to
close it higher than the open. The ideal point
would have been to buy the stock on
confirmation after the Harami.
Figure 8.7 shows the chart of Rolta India.Figure 8.7: Bullish Harami in Rolta
Notice the couple of Harami formations in
March 2005. The first Harami formation
(Point A) would have resulted in a small
loss, if a trader would have purchased the
stock on the gap up after the Harami. Again,
this will be dealt with in Chapter 11. The
second Harami formation (Point B) has ahigh significance. It is a confirmation of the
bulls entering the market. The fact that you
can see two Harami formations at the same
level indicates a great desire on the part of
the bulls to not let the prices fall further.
Guess what this confirmation Harami does to
the bear’s psyche? If the first Harami made
them nervous, the second Harami at the same
level dissolves their confidence. The shorts
start covering their position. New buying
comes in. The candlestick trader should be
buying as soon as the prices open higher the
next day. In this case, the prices again
gapped up adding to the confirmation of
trend reversal. Notice how in June 2005 the
rapid pullback was also stopped with a
spinning top Harami (Point C).Finally, let us look at the chart of ABB Ltd.
(Figure 8.8)
Figure 8.8: Bullish and Bearish Harami
reversing trends in ABB Ltd.
Notice how after the price had risen from
around the ` 2,800 area to the ` 3,300 area,
the candles started getting bigger and thevolume started expanding. Investors were
now buying exuberantly. If you had owned
this stock, where would you sell it? The
correct point would have been to sell as
soon as the Bearish Harami got confirmed.
Remember, the point of trading is not to buy
exactly at the bottom and sell exactly at the
top. Leave that to somebody else to try. It is
simply too difficult and not worth the risk.
As a candlestick trader, you will try to
capture the juicy middle part of the trend.
9
Morning Star and Evening Star
Signals
The Morning Star and Evening Star are very
powerful three-day reversal signals and once
mastered they help traders reap huge profits.Morning Star Signal
Description
Figure 9.1 shows a Morning Star signal
formation. The Japanese named it so because
like the planet Mercury, which is known as
the morning star, it foretells of good things to
come (morning). In the case of stocks, it
means that the prices will start moving
higher from here on.Figure 9.1: Morning Star signalCriteria
In order for the Morning Star signal to be
valid, the following conditions must exist:
The stock must have been in a definite
downtrend before this signal occurs. This
can be visually seen on the chart.
The first day of the signal must be a long
dark body. The second day must be a day
of indecision. The third day should be a
long white candle reaching at least half
way into the body of the first day’s dark
candle.
There are many variations of the Morning
Star signal. Figure 9.2 shows a few of thesevariations.
Figure 9.2: Morning Star signal variations
Why the Reversal Works
Consider a stock which has been steadily
moving down. Then one day panic grips the
investors in that stock. They no longer want
to hold on to the losing position. This panicselling creates a long dark candle. The next
day there is a battle between the bulls and
bears. Smart money is buying and the final
panicky sellers are happy to sell to them.
This creates indecision. The bulls seize this
opportunity to get control of the stock. The
short sellers start covering their position
leading to further upward movement. The
signal is formed when bulls are able to close
the candle half way up the dark candle
formed two days back. Probabilities support
trend reversal at this point.
The Morning Star signal is a very visual
signal, where you can actually see the change
in investor perception towards the stock. In
Figure 9.2, you can witness the various days
of indecision. If the middle day is a one-dayreversal signal, that adds more weight to the
Morning Star signal.
Notice the Abandoned Baby Morning Star
signal shown in the same figure. This is a
very powerful reversal signal. Analyze the
formation. There is a gap between the low of
the first day and the high of the second day.
There is also a gap between the high of the
second day and the low of the third day.
What is going on in that formation in terms of
fear and greed? The first gap shows panic
selling in the stock. Then the bulls and the
bears get locked into a fight. The third day
shows the outcome of the fight. The second
gap represents the strength of the victory.
You as a candlestick trader have to be in this
stock at this point!The following circumstances will further
enhance the probability of reversal shown by
the Morning Star signal:
The first day’s dark candle body is very
long compared to the rest of the trading
range. By definition of the signal, this
would necessitate that the bullish candle
on the third day be large as well.
There is a spike in volume on the
indecision day.
Stochastics are in an oversold condition.
The second day forms one of the one-day
candlestick reversal signals.
Figure 9.3 shows the chart of Bharat Heavy
Electricals Limited.Figure 9.3: A big Morning star signal in
oversold conditions in BHEL
Notice the excellent Morning Star formation
in mid-January 2007. By now your eyes
should be trained to notice some obvious
things. The position of Stochastics, the heavy
volume, and the large candles on the first and
third day of the formation all lead to a textbook type Morning Star signal.
Also notice the arrow marked on the chart in
mid-December 2006. Can you analyze why
this is not a Morning Star signal?
If you noticed that the third day of the signal
did not penetrate at least half of the first
day’s black candle, you are right. As
mentioned before, the Japanese have placed
a lot of emphasis on the half way point. The
closing of the white candle over the half way
point shows the credibility of the strength of
the bulls. It was missing in this case.
Figure 9.4 shows a Morning Star formation
in Cummins India Ltd. chart.Figure 9.4: Morning Start signal reversing
the downtrend in Cummins India
Notice in this chart that the stock gapped up
after the indecision day, even though it traded
down during the day. That gap up represents
the forceful nature of the bulls. This always
adds weight to the reversal.Figure 9.5 shows a Hammer Morning Star
signal.
Figure 9.5: Morning star signal in Essar
Oil
The Hammer tells you that all the remaining
sellers got washed out. The stock changedhands from the weak to the strong. The third
day witnessed prices closing just above the
half way point of the first day’s dark candle.
Sometimes in a Morning Star formation, the
middle day is not exactly a Doji type day. It
is a small body, indecisive day (also called a
Spinning Top). Analyze the signal formation
in Figure 9.6 (Point B) keeping in mind the
action behind the scenes. After the first down
day, the sellers were not able to drive down
the price much lower. The bulls stepped in
on the third day to take control after seeing
the selling dry out.Figure 9.6: Bulls jumping in after Morning
Star signals in Matrix Laboratories
Point A in the chart also shows the trend
reversed with a Morning Star signal. What
stopped this up trend? The Shooting Stars
and the Bearish Engulfing signal.
Let us close our discussion of Morning Starsignals with Figure 9.7 showing a chart of
Tata Steel.
Figure 9.7: Tata Steel reversing after a
Morning Star signal
We can see a well defined Morning Star
signal form in mid-June 2006. Let us assume
as a trader you buy into the position. Wherewill you take profits?
As you can see from the chart, the correct
place to take profits was after Point 5. Let us
analyze why we should not have taken profits
earlier:
Point 1: A Dark Cloud signal is formed in
overbought conditions. What do you
want to see the next day?
Confirmation selling! In this case
there was none.
Point 2: This is not a Bearish Harami. The
colour of the candles is opposite to
the definition of a Bearish Harami.
Point 3: This shows another Dark Cloud
signal. The bears are really tryinghard, but fail yet again to produce
confirmation selling.
Point 4: This is a repeat of Point 3.
Point 5: This shows a Bearish Harami in
overbought conditions. What happens
the next day? A gap down! As
mentioned before, a gap up or gap
down after a candlestick signal
formation indicates tremendous
strength in that particular direction. A
simple analysis of the situation would
have led you to take profits at this
time.Evening Star Signal
Description
Figure 9.8 shows an Evening Star signal
formation.
Figure 9.8: Evening Star signal
The Japanese named it so because like theplanet Venus, which is also known as the
evening star, it foretells of gloomy things to
come (night). In the case of the markets, it
means that the prices will be heading lower
from that point.Criteria
In order for an Evening Star signal to be
valid, the following conditions must exist:
The price must have been in a definite up
trend before this signal occurs.
The first day of the signal must be a long
white body. The second day must be a
day of indecision. The third day should
be a long dark candle reaching down at
least half way into the body of the first
day’s white candle.
Figure 9.9 shows a few of these variations of
the Evening Star signal.Figure 9.9: Evening Star signal variations
Why the Reversal Works
After an up trend, the novice investors finally
start piling into the stock. This creates the
exuberant white candle at the top. The next
day, the demand is consistently met with
supply from the smart money. The indecision
day is followed by a large down day,
indicating the bears finally taking controlfrom the bulls. As in the case of the
abandoned baby Morning Star signal, seeing
a gap between the first and second day and
also a gap between the second and third day
shows a massive change in investor
psychology. Traders should immediately
cash out their positions, or go short.
The following circumstances will further
enhance the probability of reversal shown by
the Evening Star signal:
The first day’s white candle body is very
long compared to the rest of the trading
range, indicating exuberant buying.
There is a spike in volume on the
indecision day.Stochastics are in overbought condition.
The second day forms one of the one-day
candlestick reversal signals. Figure 9.10
shows an Evening Star formation in
Hindustan Lever.
Figure 9.10: Hindustan Lever falls after anEvening Star signal
Notice that a Bearish Harami is part of the
three day signal. As I mentioned before, this
adds more weight to the reversal. One more
point to mention for this chart is the presence
of a Hanging Man signal a couple of days
before the Evening Star signal. The Hanging
Man was not confirmed. The trader who
bought into the stock after the confirmed
Hammer signal should have got out after the
Evening Star signal.
The chart in Figure 9.11 shows a classic
Evening Star signal.Figure 9.11: Combination of Shooting Star
and Evening Star signals take down S.
Kumars
The first sign of the bulls weakening was
seen with the Shooting Star signal. The
candlestick trader would not have acted on
this as it did not get confirmed. Seeing theEvening Star signal form in the immediate
vicinity of the Shooting Star gives the
candlestick trader greater confidence that the
up trend is reversing.
Going short after the Evening Star signal in
Figure 9.12 would have given a candlestick
trader very good profits.
Figure 9.12: Rapid fall after an Evening
Star signal in Syndicate BankThis chapter concludes the discussion of the
major candlestick reversal signals. We have
seen how the one-day, two-day and three-day
reversal signals work and their effectiveness
at producing strong profits.
What is expected of the readers at this point
is a complete change in their perception of
how the markets work. The stock markets, or
for that matter all other financial markets,
move because of change in investor
sentiment. You are now learning to capitalize
on this point. The sooner you learn to notice
the fear and exuberance of other people as
depicted in the charts, the faster you will
grow your portfolio.PART II
This part of the book concentrates on the
practical aspects of using candlesticks for
investing as well as trading. It is assumed at
this point that you can visually recognize the
major candlestick signals described in the
first part. I also sincerely hope that you are
analyzing the “behind-the-scenes” action
whenever you look at a chart. Bears and
bulls, supply and demand, greed and fear,
these are the key metrics you need to think
about when analyzing a chart.
The following chapters will sharpen your
candlestick skills. You will learn that when
you combine the high probability reversalcandlestick signals with western technical
analysis, the combination generates
explosive profits. You will learn the
different stop loss scenarios, in case a signal
goes sour. This is part of money management
that every person invested in the financial
markets needs to get disciplined about.
Growing a portfolio is not just about making
great profits. It is also about cutting your
losses on bad investments. What is the use of
making two good trades, gaining 20%, and
then losing it all in one bad trade?
Candlestick signals and your new mind-set
about reading the charts will empower you to
cut your losses and retain more of your
profits.
Again, please read and re-read the chaptersthat follow. Do not jump in the river without
learning to swim. The river is unforgiving.
But once you master swimming, you will
enjoy being in the water for the rest of your
life.10
Combining Candlesticks with
Technical Analysis
In this chapter we will look at candlestick
signals in combination with other technical
indicators. As you might have noticed, thus
far in all the charts we have always used
stochastics and volume in the lower portion
of the chart. We will be consistent in doing
that. If you are familiar and comfortable with
RSI, MACD or any other oscillator which
shows overbought / oversold conditions, that
is perfectly fine. The key is to find highprobability trades utilizing candlestick
signals when a security is in these extreme
conditions.
We will discuss candlestick signals in
conjunction with the following:
Support / resistance trend lines; and
Moving averages.
Every trader must read as many technical
analysis books as possible in order to gain
more and more in-depth knowledge of this
field. Education is the most essential weapon
in your trading arsenal. It takes years of
education and training to become a
successful doctor, an engineer or an
architect. Please do not think trading isotherwise. Trading might seem very easy
when looking at it from the outside. But in
reality it is not. A trader has to be armed
with knowledge, patience and discipline if
s/he wants to succeed long term in the
marketplace.Support and Resistance
The stock market is a dynamic arena. Prices
fluctuate up and down, sometimes on news,
other times seemingly with no justification.
Fundamentals of a company do not cause
prices to move. It is the reaction of the
people trading that stock that whipsaws
the price. If prices were to move based only
on the fundamentals of a company, then the
stock market would be a discrete market
where the price jumps from one point to the
next only after some news hits the wires. The
rest of the time it would be at a constant,
fixed price. We all know that does not
happen. Prices change everyday. They
change because somebody has a change in
perception for that stock. Technical analysisis the study of that perception change as seen
in a chart. What better way to see this change
of perception than using a candlestick chart.
Figure 10.1 shows a stock vacillating back
and forth between two price levels in a
sideways market.
Figure 10.1: Support and ResistanceWhenever the stock approaches the top price
level, it sells off. The supply side of
equation becomes greater than the demand
side. This price level, where there is
seemingly more supply than demand, is
defined as a resistance level. The stock is
now under pressure. The bears continue to
dominate and take it down towards another
price level, where the perception towards
that stock changes 180 degrees. The demand
side of equation now becomes greater than
its supply side. This price level where
there is more demand than supply is
termed as a support level.
Note: You can print out a chart and draw these
support/resistance lines yourself. You can also
use a Java charting application from websitessuch as Icharts.in, which will allow you to
draw these lines online.
So why does the stock keep doing what it
does, i.e. go back and forth? The answer lies
within us. We humans tend to remember
things. Consider a stock which you wanted to
buy but missed because of any number of
reasons. What will happen when the stock
pulls back to your original buy point?
Naturally, you will jump in. Now consider
thousands of traders doing that same thing. If
the stock turns and starts heading back up,
take a guess where you will start to feel
panicky. It would be right about the same
place where it started coming down from the
last time. This process gets repeated until
either the stock breaks the resistance leveland heads higher or else breaks the support
and tumbles down.
Figure 10.2 shows support and resistance
lines for an up-trending and a down-trending
stock. The logic behind the support /
resistance lines, also referred to as trend-
lines, is exactly the same as described
above.
Figure 10.2: Trend channelsLet me emphasize this point again. You are
trading human emotions in the market, not the
actual stock. The faster you accept this
mantra, the clearer you will hear the market
signals.
A few points about these trend lines:
Trend-lines can be horizontal or sloping.
The more number of times the price tests
the trend line, the stronger the support or
resistance.
Once a support trend line is broken,
not intraday, but on a closing basis, it
will function as a resistance trend line
from then on. Similarly, once a
resistance trend-line is broken on aclosing basis, it will function as a
support trend-line from that point
onwards.
This is better explained visually in Figure
10.3 and Figure 10.4.
Figure 10.3: Previous resistance becomes
supportFigure 10.4: Previous support becomes
resistance
Figure 10.5 shows the chart of Polaris
Software.Figure 10.5: Support / Resistance lines in
Polaris
Notice the different trend-lines that can be
seen. Also notice that in December, the stock
tested the old resistance line. This time,
though, that line acted as support. If you are
now thorough with the candlestick signals,
you will recognize the bullish Harami whichstopped the selling in December, right on the
support line. Please analyze the three signals
that are circled in the chart.
The trader should also be aware of the fact
that these trend lines are subjective. You can
draw a trend line which can be different than
the one I draw. After all, you are just taking
two or more points on the chart and plotting
a line through them. Then what is it that
determines which is the correct trend line to
be trading off?
Let the market tell you which the correct
trend line is. As a candlestick trader, what
would you expect the market to show
when approaching a trend line? A
candlestick signal! Therefore, whichevertrend line the signal is formed at is the
correct trend line.
Figure 10.6 shows the well defined
resistance area in Punjab Tractors.
Figure 10.6: Punjab Tractors unable to
close above the resistanceNotice the following candlestick signals in
the chart at that trend line:
1. A Bearish Engulfing signal in September:
2. A Piercing pattern in early October:
3. A Hanging Man in late October; and
4. A Piercing signal in early December.
Notice the chart of Satyam Computer in
Figure 10.7Figure 10.7: Satyam Computer riding up in
a trend channel
This chart clearly defines a trend channel for
the stock from around August 2006 till
February 2007. Every time the stock hits the
upper trend channel, the supply of shares
exceeds the demand for them. Similarly, thedemand for the stock is heavy along the
lower channel. These demand-supply
imbalances make the stock fluctuate between
those imaginary trend lines. Close
observation of the chart at the reversal points
along the trend channel indicates the
following points:
Point 1: Bullish Harami.
Point 2: Hanging Man.
Point 3: Bullish Harami.
Point 4: Bearish Engulfing.
Point 5: Bullish Engulfing.
Point 6: This illustrates the previous trendchannel now acting as resistance.
The examples above show how candlesticks
work with support and resistance lines. If as
a trader you anticipate a reversal situation at
a particular point on the chart, then the
knowledge of candlesticks will add
confirmation to your expectation. If you
expect a stock to turn lower at a resistance
point but candlesticks show a tall white
candle breaching that point, then your
expectation should be negated. You should
realize at that point that the stock has broken
resistance with good force. On the other
hand, if you see a Doji followed by a
Hanging Man and a lower close at that
resistance point, you know your expectation
is fulfilled. The probabilities are in thefavour of the stock heading down.Moving Averages
Moving averages essentially provide a
directional trend to a stock or the market.
They smooth out the ups and downs of the
trend and provide the immediate direction
the stock is headed in. Moving averages have
a lot of applications in technical trading. The
most common way traders have used them in
the past is to buy a stock whenever a shorter
term moving average (MA) crosses upward
through a longer term moving average.
Conversely, they would sell a stock
whenever the shorter term MA crossed
below the longer term MA.
This application of moving averages is,
however, usually not the best technique tofollow as it is a lagging method. What this
means is that the signal to buy is often
generated too late in the trend.
Using candlestick signals with moving
averages enhances the returns on
investment many-fold. These moving
averages provide support and resistance to a
trending stock just like the trend-lines we
drew in the previous section of this chapter.
The most common moving averages are the
simple MA and the exponential MA. For our
discussion purposes, we will stick to the
simple moving average (SMA). Readers
should refer to other technical analysis books
if they want further information on
exponential MAs.The simple MA is defined as follows:
Moving Average (N) = (A1+A2+A3+ . . . + AN) / N
Where N = the period over which the average is
calculated.
A1 . . . An = closing prices over the last N days.
This is a dynamic curve and is calculated
every day after prices close. Most money
managers in the world use 50 MA or 200
MA. For trading purposes, having a 20- or a
30-day MA is optimal. The key to using the
correct moving average is to let the stock
chart tell you. Pull up a chart and put various
moving averages on it. This is very easy
nowadays with online charting. All you have
to do is select “Simple Moving Average”
and type in different numbers like 20, 30, 50,etc. Once you have these lines on the
candlestick chart, select the one from which
the stock bounces off (reverses or supports)
from the most. That is the moving average to
use.
Candlesticks are excellent for finding
reversal situations. They tell you the
internal dynamics of the market. However,
they do not give you a target price. You can
calculate the price targets using other tools
of technical analysis. One way is to see
where the dominant moving averages are.
Stocks will usually tend to fluctuate around
particular moving averages.
As an example, Figure 10.8 shows you the
chart of Grasim Industries.Figure 10.8: Grasim following its moving
averages
You can notice in the figure that in July 2006
a Morning Star signal formed right on the 50-
day simple moving average (SMA). From
that point on, the stock price used the 20
SMA as support till December, when itfinally broke down below both the 50 SMA
and 20 SMA.
The moving averages act like magnets for the
price. The concept of moving averages is
similar to the concept of trend lines which
we discussed earlier. Moving averages are
dynamic trend lines.
Figure 10.9 shows a chart of Sujana Metal.Figure 10.9: Sujana Metal using the 50
SMA as support
Traders would have had a fun time trading
this chart. The 50 day SMA is a powerful
force for this stock. Notice the following
signals:Point 1: Bullish Harami.
Point 2: Doji with a gap up next day.
Remember, this is a powerful signal.
The Doji showed the indecision on
the part of bulls and bears and the
gap up the next day, showed the
decision being made in favour of the
bulls.
Point 3: Morning Star signal.
Point 4: Bullish Harami.
In concluding this chapter, it would be
appropriate to emphasize that a trader needs
to have as much probability in his or her
favour as possible. A combination of
candlestick charts with technical analysis isan excellent system to achieve this.
11
Trading Setup
Thus far we have learnt the major
candlestick signals and how to use them with
common western technical analysis. You
have witnessed the high degree of accuracy
of these signals in predicting reversals. The
probability of the reversal is greatly
enhanced when two or more signals confirm
it. I have always put more weight on the
Morning Star and Evening Star signals if the
middle day is a one-day candlestick reversal
signal, such as a Hammer or Hanging Man. If
a bullish engulfing signal is forming at theexact support level from where the stock
bounced up the previous time, it brings that
much more credibility to the reversal.
This knowledge should put you way ahead of
your competitors. The next time when you
see a stock fall 10 percent, you will not rush
to buy it because it looks cheap. You have
probably heard of the saying, “Don’t try to
catch a falling knife”. That is very true. That
stock which is down 10 percent can further
go down another 20 percent. On the other
hand, it could very well reverse and start a
new leg up from here. You do not know
which of the two might happen. All you
know is the candle formation. Rely on the
signals. Do you see a buy signal form? Are
the stochastics in the right place? Is thereconfirmation buying? These are the points
you will be looking at.
As a candlestick trader, you are not
looking to buy exact bottoms and selling at
exact tops. You want the middle chunk of
the trend.
I have written this chapter with two
objectives in mind.
1. To show you the exit strategies when
candlestick signals fail because, yes, they
do sometimes fail!
2. To share trading ideas which I have
found useful over years of trading stocks
and options.Getting Real — Candlesticks Fail,
Too!
I would have liked to tell you that
candlestick signals are 100% effective, that
they never fail, that they are the magic
charms you have been waiting for.
Unfortunately, I cannot!
Candlestick signals are truly very effective.
They have been tested for over four
centuries. If they would not have worked,
they wouldn’t have been around this long.
They show reversal points with a high
degree of probability. But the key word is
probability. There are going to be times,
albeit only a few, when you have the perfect
signal, stochastics are in the perfect place,the signal is confirmed, you get in — and
then the stock starts heading in the other
direction. This is going to happen,
guaranteed!
Trading is like a business. There are times in
a business where you face losses. That is
perfectly normal and expected by all good
businessmen.
They know that in order to succeed, their
gains must overcome their occasional losses.
This is the exact philosophy a trader needs to
have. Losses are inevitable in trading. You
cannot control the market environment. The
stock might be in an excellent buy scenario,
but the market might be falling out of the bed.
This will put pressure on the individualstock. It will negate the buy scenario with
some dark candles. In such a case the market
would have proved you wrong. As a trader,
you have two choices at this point:
1. Ride your ego. Ignore the fact that the
market negated the buy signal. Assure
yourself that you have more knowledge
than the combined market and that the
stock will go in your direction soon.
Keep holding — and watch your losses
mount.
2. Acknowledge the fact that this trade has
failed. Get out with a small loss and wait
for the next buy signal.
Most traders who choose the first optionequate the failed trade with a personal
failure. They cannot accept the fact that even
with all the technical analysis knowledge
they possess, they still have a losing trade. If
you have to succeed at trading, you will
have to overcome this pitfall. It is by no
means an easy one. But, nevertheless, you
will have to do it. There is no way around it.
All your candlestick and technical analysis
knowledge will not make your portfolio
grow if you cannot take a small loss.
The old but wise adage “Cut your losses
short and let your profits run” is the only way
to be a successful trader. So now the
question arises, “Where do you cut your
losses?” 2% down, or 5%, or 10%? Some
technical analysis books suggest 5%, otherssuggest 7%. These percentages do not mean
much to a candlestick trader. The questions
and answers that follow may look very
basic. Yet, they contain the key to a trader’s
dilemma of placing a stop loss.
Question: Why is the candlestick trader long
in the stock?
Answer: Because of a candlestick buy signal
formation.
Question: Where would the candlestick
trader place a stop loss?
Answer: The point which shows that the
candlestick buy signal is negated.
Question: Why is the candlestick tradershort in the stock?
Answer: Because of a candlestick sell signal
formation.
Question: Where would a candlestick trader
place a stop loss?
Answer: The point which shows that the
candlestick sell signal is negated.
As simple as that!
Just as there is a reason for buying a stock,
there should be reason for taking a loss. Let
us analyze the stop loss scenario. As a
candlestick trader, you have found a perfect
buy signal in oversold conditions. You wait
for the confirmation and then buy. In otherwords, the bears who were controlling the
stock were overcome by the bulls, which is
what formed the signal. The confirmation
gave you the trigger and confidence that the
bulls were still in it. After a couple of days,
because of whatsoever reason, there is a
dark candle which takes the stock price back
to the buy point. What does that imply? It
implies that the bulls have lost control to the
bears. This is not what should have
happened after a candlestick buy signal. The
trend should have been reversed. However,
the signals now are telling you that the bears
have been able to drive the price back
through the point where the bulls had
assumed control previously. Why, then,
would you want to be long in this “bear-
controlled” stock? As you noticed from thisscenario, a stop loss is not a question of
setting arbitrary percentages. It is analyzing
each situation independently to find the
point where the bulls or bears cede control
to the other.
We will look at some of the common
candlestick signals and how to set stop
losses if these signals fail.Hammer
As shown in Figure 11.1, the bottom of the
Hammer is a good support point. The bulls
had shown their dominance at that point,
bringing the prices all the way up. It is quite
logical to assume that if the price drops
below the low of the Hammer, the signal is
negated.
Figure 11.1: Stop out level for a Hammer
signalInverted Hammer
The bottom of the body of the Inverted
Hammer (Figure 11.2) is considered a strong
support area.
Figure 11.2: Stop out level for an Inverted
Hammer signal
If the price declines below this point, it
shows that the bulls were not able to hold thesupport. Getting out of the trade is then the
prudent thing to do.Bullish Engulfing Signal
As Figure 11.3 shows, the bottom of the
bullish candle is logically analyzed to be a
strong support.
Figure 11.3: Stop out level for a Bullish
Engulfing signal
That is the price at which the bulls started
taking control from the bears. After the signal
is confirmed, prices should not get backthrough this point.Piercing Signal
Where did the bulls take control from the
bears in the Piercing signal in Figure 11.4?
Figure 11.4: Stop out level for a Piercing
signal
The bottom of the bullish candle! It then
makes logical sense to put your stop loss just
below (typically 0.1% below) this price
point. The piercing signal is considerednegated if prices come back down through
this point.Bullish Harami
In the case of a Bullish Harami, the logical
point to set the stop loss is just below the
bottom of the bullish candle as shown in
Figure 11.5. The bulls had assumed control
at that point and should not be letting the
price slip below that.
Figure 11.5: Stop out level for a Bullish
Harami signalMorning Star Signal
Figure 11.6 shows a Morning Star stop loss
scenario.
Figure 11.6: Stop out level for a Morning
Star signal
As long as the price does not trade below the
low of the signal formation, the bulls are still
in control. The Morning Star signal is very
powerful and rarely will one fail. But atrader should be aware of the stop loss
setting just in case it were to happen.Hanging Man Signal
As shown in Figure 11.7, the top of the
Hanging Man signal is considered resistance.
This is because the bears had seized control
from the bulls at that price. If the bulls can
take the price above the body of the Hanging
Man, the signal is considered failed.
Figure 11.7: Stop out level for a Hanging
Man signalShooting Star Signal
Figure 11.8 shows the stop loss setting for a
Shooting Star.
Figure 11.8: Stop out level for a Shooting
Star signal
If you go short on a confirmed Shooting Star
signal, get out immediately if the bulls
manage to trade the stock above the high
point. That piercing of the high point showsstrength on the part of bulls, something you
as a short seller don’t want to see!Bearish Engulfing Signal
The bulls would be considered in charge of
the stock again, if they can manage to close
prices above the body of the dark candle as
shown in Figure 11.9. As a short seller, you
do not want to be in this trade anymore.
Figure 11.9: Stop out level for a Bearish
Engulfing signalDark Cloud Cover
It is recommended to set your stop loss just
above the open of the dark candle of the
Dark Cloud Cover in Figure 11.10. That is
the point where the bears seized control from
the bulls previously. Prices trading above
this point will negate this signal.
Figure 11.10: Stop out level for a DarkCloud signalBearish Harami Signal
As shown in Figure 11.11, the open of the
dark candle is resistance. It is recommended
to place a stop just above this level. The
bulls are assumed to be still in control if
prices trade above this point.
Figure 11.11: Stop out level for a Bearish
Harami signalEvening Star Signal
Figure 11.12 shows an Evening Star signal
stop loss scenario. The high of the Evening
Star is a logical resistance point. Placing a
stop loss just above this point would allow
the candlestick trader to get out with only a
small loss.
Figure 11.12: Stop out level for an
Evening Star signal
The key point is to analyze what price actionis shown by the signals once you have
entered the market. The price action should
follow your expected path. This analysis
should be done daily for all the positions
held in the account. It should not take too
much time to do this analysis once your eyes
are trained and the signals are properly
understood. That is the reason I have
emphasized the importance of understanding
the psychology behind the candlestick
signals.
Figure 11.13 shows the chart of Jaiprakash
Associates.Figure 11.13: Failed Bullish Harami
You can notice in this chart that the first
Bullish Harami would have given the trader
a small loss. The trader should have got out
as soon as the bears drove the prices below
the open of the white Harami candle. A
couple of days later, the trader should havegot back in on another Bullish Harami signal.
This trade would have made a very good
profit. You have to cut your losses short and
let your profits run!
Some of you might be thinking — Why did I
need the stop loss? Even if I would have
held on after the failure of the first Bullish
Harami, I would have not had much loss. The
stock eventually rebounded.
Yes, you are correct that the stock
rebounded. But would you have known that
when the stock came down through the open
of the Harami? How would you have known
the extent of the downward slide from that
point on? In reality, there is no way to know
that. Hindsight is always 20 / 20. Then whyrisk your money. Take the small loss and find
another high probability signal. If you like
this stock, then keep monitoring it. You have
already witnessed one buy signal. The
stochastics are oversold. Just wait for
another buy signal. You would have been
handsomely rewarded in this case if you
would have entered on the second buy signal.
Figure 11.14 shows the chart of Grasim
Industries Ltd.Figure 11.14: Failed Bullish Harami in
Grasim
If a candlestick trader had bought this stock
on 27 February 2007, right after the Bullish
Harami in oversold condition, s/he would
have been following the rules. The
probabilities indicated that the Harami might
have stopped the selling and the gap up nextday might have indicated some bullish
sentiment. However, the trader should have
sold out as soon as the stock breached and
closed lower than the open of the Harami
day. The probabilities were no longer in his
or her favour. The stock can go down 10
more points from here, or 50 more points.
Always trade with the probabilities!
Figure 11.15 shows the chart of Syndicate
Bank.Figure 11.15: Trading the candle signals in
Syndicate Bank
At the beginning of July 2006, we notice a
bullish Harami Doji being formed. The next
day there is confirmation buying (Point 1).
The candlestick trader would get in at this
point. There were two more conditionswhich made this a good buy point:
1. Stochastics were in an oversold
condition; and
2. The bullish Harami Doji formed near the
same level where the stock found support
in mid-June 2006.
As you can see from the chart, things did not
go as anticipated. The candlestick trader
should have sold out his position as soon as
it closed below the bottom of the Harami
(Point 2). Getting in the stock again after the
Bullish Engulfing signal (Point 3), would
have yielded a very profitable subsequent
trade.
Figure 11.16 shows the chart of L&T Ltd.Figure 11.16: Resistance becomes support
in L&T
The Bearish Engulfing signal at the beginning
of November (Point 1) was an excellent
point to short sell the stock. The stochastics
were in over bought conditions and thesignal confirmed a previous resistance point
from mid-September. Let us analyze what
happened from then on:
A Morning Star signal stopped the
downtrend. The trader would still be
okay at this point.
We then witnessed a Doji, then a
Spinning Top, another Doji and another
Spinning Top. All these indecisive days
occurred at the same resistance level.
Then a Shooting Star was formed. At this
point the candlestick trader should be
comfortable that the bears are not giving
up on the stock. Though the bears are not
too forceful in driving the prices lower,
they are still the dominant party.The trader would then have witnessed
the big dark candle confirming the
Shooting Star. Everything is still
implying that the supply exceeds the
demand at around the ` 1,360 price range.
Then we see a Bullish Harami occur. No
reason to panic yet. The trader is still in
the trade.
The next day prices gap up over the
resistance area indicating a change in
investor sentiment. This is not what the
stock should have been doing if the bears
were still in control. It’s time, therefore,
for the trader to get out. The market has
handed over control to the bulls.
Figure 11.17 shows the chart of HindustanPetroleum Ltd.
Figure 11.17: Failed trade in Hindustan
Petroleum
You will notice that a bullish Harami formed
at the beginning of December 2006.
Stochastics were in oversold conditions. The
next day provided confirmation buying for
the candlestick trader to get in. What shouldbe expected after that? Continued buying!
However the trade fizzled out and the trader
should have been stopped out as shown in
the chart.
I would like to ask you to look at the chart in
Figure 11.17 again in a different perspective.
Should you have even made this trade?
Analyze the chart thoroughly. I have defined
the “buy point” and the “stop out point”
earlier. What is the target point in this case?
Where do you expect the stock to reach?
Hint: Use concepts from the previous
chapter.
Figure 11.18 is the same as Figure 11.17, but
with the target point.Figure 11.18: Re-visiting the previous
trade with technical analysis
The target point in this case is the extension
of the old support line. Notice the Head and
Shoulders formation beginning in October
and lasting till the end of November. The
market broke the neck-line and then tried torally back above it, but failed.
So the candlestick trader, upon seeing the
buy scenario, should have waited to get into
the market until the new resistance was
successfully breached to the upside.
Otherwise the reward-risk ratio (described
in the next section of this chapter) did not
warrant the trade.
Also notice the stock failing to breach the
resistance in January 2007.
As emphasized in the previous chapter, the
concepts that “old resistance becomes new
support once breached” and “old support
becomes new resistance once breached” are
a very powerful tool in the trader’s arsenal.Hopefully, by now you have gained some
confidence in the stop loss procedures using
candlestick signals. Remember that the
signals convey all the information you need
to take a logical decision.Trading Tips from a Candlestick
Trader’s Perspective
This section will detail some of the nuances
that will help you improve your trading one
notch further. These are not hard and fast
rules, but a collection of my trading
guidelines. Some have been learnt from
observation and others of a trade from actual
trading experience.Always Work Out the Risk-Reward
Ratio
If you have read any trading book, you know
of the three basic price points you need to be
aware of even before placing the trade:
The entry point — this is the point to
buy after a confirmed candlestick signal.
The stop loss point — this is the point to
exit the trade if the stock is not
performing as expected.
The target point — this is the point
where you expect the stock to reach if the
trade is successful, usually a previous
high or perceived resistance level.These points help you define the “reward to
risk ratio” as follows:
The higher the reward-risk ratio, the more
compelling is the trade. Traders normally
like to have at least a reward-risk ratio of 2,
or higher. Personally, I like to see 3 or
higher. You will have to decide what ratio
you are comfortable with.
Just because you notice an excellent
candlestick buy signal does not mean you
have to enter the trade. Always calculate the
reward-risk ratio. If you could lose ` 10 for a
possible gain of ` 15, the trade is not worthit, no matter how good the candlestick signal.Don’t Turn a Trade into an
Investment
This is the most common mistake committed
by traders. They see a good buy situation
setting up. They notice the stochastics are
oversold and can sense panic selling in the
market. Then the buy signal is formed. They
know their entry point, their target point and
also their stop loss point. They enter the
market feeling confident that the trend has
reversed. The stock moves up as expected.
The traders are happy. Everything is good
and rosy. Soon, however, the stock starts
dropping. The bears start taking control of
the stock and push it down past through the
stop loss point. The trader hesitates at thiscritical juncture. Something inside his mind
knows, now is the time to sell and accept the
loss. But, then, hope crawls in. Hope, that
ultimate trickster! The trader convinces
himself that the stock will rebound anytime
now. He promises to himself to get out as
soon as the stock comes to break even. Alas,
the market is unforgiving to such “weak
hearted” traders. By the end of the day, the
stock is down considerably. This leads to the
biggest mistake of all. Now the trader
convinces himself that the company whose
stock he just bought is fundamentally very
sound. The prospects for the company are
great. He will keep holding and buying more,
so he can average out the price.
The problem with this scenario is multifold:The trader has no inkling how far down
the stock is going to go. So his portfolio
is not under his control anymore.
His money is now tied into an
“investment” which is losing its value.
He is losing other valuable opportunities
by not having that money at his disposal,
and, most importantly,
He is mentally shaken and his confidence
rattled by watching his portfolio go
down.
Do not turn your losing trades into a long
term investment. Get out if the candlestick
signals fail and wait for another buy
opportunity.Avoid Trading Low Volume Stocks
Candlestick signals indicate the sum total of
all the investment knowledge of the traders
in that particular stock. The larger the
number of traders participating in the stock,
the better is the signal. High volume stocks
are better to trade using candlesticks than
very low volume stocks. Figure 11.19 shows
a chart of ACE India Ltd.Figure 11.19: Avoid these kind of low
volume stocks
This is not a good chart to trade from. As a
candlestick trader, you want the chart to be
clean. Look at previous reversal points on
the chart. Usually, if a chart has given good
signals in the past, it will give good signalsin the future. If you find a chart which is
difficult to analyze, skip it. There are plenty
of other charts to play with. Always get all
the variables in your favour before you step
into a trade.Avoid Taking a Position before
Earnings Reports
As a candlestick trader, you are relying on
the signals on the chart. This is, by
definition, technical trading. You do not want
to engage yourself in fundamental decision
making processes. When fundamental news
hits the wires, technicals will take a
backseat. Earnings declarations are one of
the fundamental news a trader needs to stay
away from. It is highly recommended to not
have a position in a company which is about
to declare its earnings. It is just not worth it.
You can employ various hedging positions,
but that is beyond the scope of this book. If
you are in a stock whose earnings arescheduled to be released after the bell, exit
the position during the day. This does not
mean that you should not trade during
earnings season every quarter. Just make sure
you exit the position before earnings are
released. There are many other opportunities
in the market to trade from. As a candlestick
trader, you can watch what candle formations
occur after the earnings news is released and
then take a decision to go long or short.
Similar fundamental news, such as a drug
approval decision, a huge contract decision,
takeover speculation, etc., should be treated
the same way. Always keep in mind that you
are a trader, not a gambler. Any trading
situation in which a news outcome can
completely disrupt your rationale for
entering a position should be avoided. Icannot emphasize this enough.Don’t be Trigger-Shy
Many traders experience hesitation in
entering the market at the right time even
after an excellent signal appears. This
happens primarily because of a lack of
confidence in one’s trading skills. Such
traders come up with different excuses as to
why they should not trade “this time”.
How many of the following excuses have you
given yourself?
The signal is good but somebody in the
online chat group said not to buy this
stock.
Let me paper trade just this one moretime. I will buy from the next time
onwards.
Analysts on TV and newspapers are
saying the market will go down now. So I
will pass this good buy signal.
Even though I can see a sell signal,
everyone else is buying. The signal might
be wrong. Let me pass this trade.
I am not wearing my favourite coloured
shirt, my hair is not combed, my makeup
today is not good, and so on.
You get the point!
As a candlestick trader, you have centuries
of testing backing you up. You understand the
psychology behind the formations. You arenow able to see the market from the greed
and fear perspective. You have confidence
that the signals represent high probability
reversal situations. You are also aware that
should the signal go sour, you have decided
the precise point to get out with a small loss.
Trade confidently. You have to start.
Otherwise, you cannot win.Don’t Target Buying Exact Tops and
Selling Exact Bottoms
As a candlestick trader, you should not be
concerned with buying at the exact bottom or
selling at the exact top. That is a very
difficult task compared to taking the chunk of
the trend in between the top and the bottom.
Some traders see a good bullish engulfing
signal, prepare to buy on confirmation, but
never do. They lament about not getting in at
the bottom of the long engulfing candle. They
do not look at the trend reversal and the fact
that the stock can now give them a good up
trend.
As a candlestick trader, you will only buy onconfirmation of the signal. You will only sell
or short on confirmation of a sell signal.
Nothing else matters.Overbought and Oversold Conditions
are Secondary to Candlestick Signals
We have used stochastics throughout the
book to indicate overbought and oversold
conditions. These are to be used only as
indicators. The over-riding factor in any
buying or selling decision should be the
candlestick signal.
If you bought a stock on a buy signal when
stochastics were in oversold conditions, then
you will sell only when you analyze that the
bears have taken control. Just because the
stock has become overbought should not in
itself mean anything to you. A stock, or any
market for that matter, can stay overboughtfor weeks or even months. Similarly, a stock
or a market can stay oversold for a long time.
This happens when the stock or market is in
a trend. The trend channel, as described in
the previous chapter, becomes the support
and resistance for the stock. If the stock is in
an up trend, it might not get to oversold
conditions till the time it moves from the
upper trend line to the lower trend line.
Now, in such trending stocks you need to
decide if you want to get out on a sell signal
at the top of the trend and buy again when it
gets to the bottom, or just keep holding the
stock until it breaks the up-trending channel.
This is a personal matter of choice.The Trend is Your Friend
“The trend is your friend” is another adage in
the stock trading world, which every trader
should make use of in his trading. What this
implies in simple terms is that a trader
should trade only in the direction of the
trend:
If a stock is trending up, then only buy on
candlestick buy signals and sell out on
sell signals. Do not short sell on a sell
signal.
If a stock is trending down, then short
sell on a candlestick sell signal and buy
back on a buy signal. But do not buy
long.Imagine the market to be like a flowing river.
If the river is flowing upstream, then why
would you want to swim downstream,
against the current? Use the strength of the
current to your advantage. Swim upstream.
So, too, with the markets. In an up trending
stock, always buy on a candlestick buy
signal. You can sell out when a sell signal
appears to protect your profits. But shorting
the stock is not advisable because the weight
of the market is against you. When the stock
breaks the up trend line, a new dynamic is
generated. Use the candlestick signals to
short the stock at the right time.Targets are Only Targets
When you decide to enter a trade, you have a
certain target in mind that you analyze the
stock should be able to reach. You will take
your profits at that point if the signals tell
you to. This target point could be either:
A previous major high or low;
A major trend line;
A Fibonacci re-tracement level; or
A major moving average.
That is all very good. You have taken all the
steps a trader needs to take before entering a
trade. However, you must realize that themarket does not care who is trading it, what
price level you entered at, or what price
level is your target. That is all in your head.
Those are parameters you have decided for
your trade. It can very well happen that after
you buy a stock, it goes up, but forms a
candlestick sell signal before reaching your
target. Please take profits. The markets are
sending you a signal. Ignore it at your own
risk. Targets are just that, targets. Nothing
more! The signal is the over-riding factor.
If you see the stock climb back up after you
sold on a sell signal, do not fret about it. You
made a good trade and, more importantly,
you abided by your rules. This will ensure
your long term success.Don’t Become a Victim of Analysis
Paralysis
There are over a hundred technical
indicators which traders can use to help them
decipher which way a stock is heading.
Online charting has helped revolutionize
technical trading. Traders can now program
their own indicators and back-test them on
different stocks. That shows them how
accurate the indicators have performed in the
past. They can then tweak the parameters
which define the indicators and try to make
them as accurate as possible. Technical
traders take great pride in doing these
exercises. However, many a time traders
face the “analysis paralysis” phenomenon.They have too many indicators and
oscillators on the chart. This crowds the
price action of the signal leading to
indecision. Your goal as a trader is to
identify the best possible support and
resistance levels for the stock and act
accordingly. If you have five different
moving averages, Fibonacci re-tracement
levels, support-resistance lines, along with
stochastics, MACD, RSI, volume, on balance
volume and a few other oscillators set up on
the chart, it is going to get very confusing.
The trader will never enter a trade if there
are too many price points which could act as
resistance or support, whichever the case
may be. Let the chart be clear. Pick your
favourite oscillator, a couple of moving
averages and your trend lines.You should also be aware that different
oscillators will show oversold and
overbought conditions at different times. One
oscillator might suggest that the stock is still
heading down while another might suggest it
has bottomed. This again will lead to
indecision on the part of traders as they will
not be confident about the direction of the
trade. So, keep the charts simple.Money Management
Diversification is an important tool for
traders as well as investors. If you have ` 10
lakh in your portfolio, please do not use the
entire amount to invest or trade shares of just
one company. That would be suicidal. A lot
of traders and investors have been burnt
because of lack of diversification. Any
position you buy should not be such that it
dramatically affects your portfolio upon
getting a drastic hit though the position
should be large enough to make you pay
attention to it.
The following is an example of how I would
build a portfolio with ` 10 lakh of capital.
Let me emphasize — this is just an example.You will have to decide what suits you and
your trading style.
I would divide the capital into 10 parts,
giving me ` 1 lakh each for ten trades. I
would then find 10 stocks with candlestick
buy or sell signals and enter into 10 different
trades.
If the share price of a company is ` 50, I
would buy 2,000 shares. If the share price is
` 500, I would only buy 200. This is to make
sure I only use ` 1 lakh for each trade.
This keeps emotional buying out of a trade.
Sometimes traders see an excellent buy
signal in perfect conditions. They are sure
beyond any doubt that this will be a winningtrade. So they buy more shares for this
position. Unfortunately, if the trade goes the
other way, they will be sitting on a much
higher loss than should have been the case.
Remember, you are always dealing with
probabilities! Think of every trade as having
the same probability of success. Do not
favour one trade over the other.
12
Candlesticks for Longer Term
TradingTrading for the “Not-So-Active”
Trader
Candlesticks work very well for investing
purposes, too. There are people who do not
like getting in and out of stocks very often.
They want to participate in wealth building
through financial instruments on a long term
basis. Historically, markets have a tendency
to drift higher. Most companies, after all, list
themselves on the stock exchange to
increase, and not diminish, their shareholder
value.
These investors are willing to ride out the
ups and downs of the market in anticipation
of long term gains. It might work or it might
not. In the world today where technology ischanging by the minute, there is no guarantee
that a leading company today will be in
existence even one year from now. To make
sure that as an investor you are not investing
in companies that will eventually wipe out
your portfolio, you need to monitor the
companies. Maybe not every day as a trader
would, but at least once a week. When a
company has something negative which
would affect it in a fundamental way, guess
where you will notice it? On the charts! In
cases where a deterioration of company
fundamentals is happening, most individual
investors will not have a clue until the share
prices tank. But the candlestick charts will
show the investor what the company
management is unwilling to.Work with Weekly Charts
As an investor, you will look at the charts
displayed on weekly time frame. Most
charting services will allow you to display a
chart in a daily, weekly or monthly time
frame. You may have noticed that most of this
book uses daily charts. However, candlestick
signals work just the same way on a weekly
chart or on a monthly chart. Nothing changes.
The signal formations and the psychology
behind them are exactly the same. For a
weekly chart, the candle opens at the start of
the trading week and closes at the end of the
trading week. For a monthly candlestick
chart, the candle opens at the start of the
month and closes at the end of the month. For
a weekly chart, the high and the low of thecandle are the highest price the stock reached
in that week and the lowest price the stock
reached in that week, respectively. For the
monthly chart, the high and low are the
highest price the stock reached in the month
and the lowest price the stock reached in the
month, respectively.
In general, if you are using weekly charts,
you would expect to be in the market for
weeks, or maybe even months, at a time.
Your gains will be much higher than if you
were trading the daily charts. On the flip
side, if a signal faults out, you will not know
of it until the end of the week when the
candle closes. That would translate into a
higher loss. But remember, again, the
probabilities are on your side when you buyand sell on a candlestick signal.
Figure 12.1 shows the weekly chart of Bank
of India.
Figure 12.1: Morning Star in Bank of India
with stochastics oversoldAfter weeks of selling and domination by the
bears, the stock formed a Morning Star
reversal signal. Also notice that the
stochastics were in oversold conditions. The
perfect time to buy would have been in the
week after the week of the Morning Star
signal.
As I mentioned before, none of the procedure
for buying or selling changes when using
weekly charts. The only change is the time
frame of trading. The trader or investor using
this chart would have stayed in the position
for at least 2 months before exiting.
Figure 12.2 shows the weekly chart of
Syndicate Bank.Figure 12.2: Evening Star signal starts the
downtrend in Syndicate Bank
In the early part of May 2006, you will
notice an Evening Star formation. Long term
traders could have put on short positions as
soon as the signal got confirmed. The
downtrend was stopped by a Doji-typeweek, followed by a Bullish Engulfing
signal.
Figure 12.3 shows the Nifty index plotted
with a weekly time frame.
Figure 12.3: Trading candle signals on the
Nifty weekly chartThis chart is proof that candlesticks work
very well for indexes on a weekly time
frame, just like they do on daily time frames.
Notice the following points about the chart:
Point 1: An Evening Star signal stopped
Nifty’s advance at the beginning of
October 2005.
Pont 2: A bullish Harami signal ended the
short downtrend in November 2005.
Point 3: The Nifty had a very good run till
May 2006, where an ugly Evening
Star formation broke its trend.
Point 4: This particular downtrend was
broken in June 2006 by a Morning
Star signal.Point 5: In February 2007 you can witness a
Doji type week, followed by a
Hanging Man signal.
Figure 12.4 shows the weekly chart of
Jaiprakash Associates. Notice the strong up
trend till ` 500 was broken with the
formation of a Bearish Harami. The chart
also points out a Bearish Engulfing signal
prior to where the up trend reversed. At this
point, and ask yourself, if one should have
shorted the stock? Looking at the chart it is
obvious that you should not have. What is the
significant difference between the Bearish
Harami and the Bearish Engulfing on this
chart? Confirmation of the candlestick
signal!Figure 12.4: Bearish Engulfing signal
topples Jaiprakash Associates
It is very important for any candlestick signal
to be confirmed before initiating a position.
Notice that the Bearish Engulfing signal was
negated with a Bullish Harami formation.
The Bearish Harami formation was
confirmed with another bearish candle and
lower close. This would be the place to goshort anticipating a down move.
Observe the weekly chart of GMR
Infrastructure in Figure 12.5.
Figure 12.5: Trading with candles signals
in the weekly chart of GMR Infrastructure
After a few Spinning Tops and small body
candles throughout March 2007, the stock
formed a Hammer signal. This was
confirmed in the next couple of weeksindicating the possible start of an up trend.
This rally ended with a Shooting Star
formation, confirmed by a bearish candle in
the following week. Could this possible
pullback have been anticipated? Maybe.
Where do most investors buy? Near the top!
Notice the candles getting larger as the rally
gained steam and the stock more than tripled.
This is where the common man decides to
jump in so as not to miss the boat. A very
good sign that the stock is about to reverse.
One more point to emphasize is that technical
analysis can be applied to weekly charts, just
as it would to daily charts. Support /
resistance lines, trend channels, technical
patterns are formed by repetitive andunchanging human behaviour. Fear is fear
whether on a daily chart. a weekly chart or
even on a 15 minute chart. There is nothing
magical about it. We are prone to act the
same way, no matter what our trading time
horizon is.
Figure 12.6 shows Infosys Technologies
breaking out of a long downtrend on a
weekly chart. Here are some key points to
observe:
Point 1: An Evening Star formation starts the
downtrend.Figure 12.6: Using support / resistance on
weekly charts
Point 2: A Bullish Harami confirmed the day
after. Would one buy at this point
given the downtrend line resistance
just overhead? That would not be a
good idea.
Point 3: A Hammer formation confirmed the
day after. Apply the same logic asPoint 2.
Point 4: A Morning Star signal. There is a
difference this time around. The
investor sentiment has changed to a
point where the stock breaks the
downtrend resistance with a strong
bullish confirmation. A good place to
get in for a trade!
Point 5: An Evening Star signal confirmed
one should get out of the trade.
Point 6: This emphasizes that old resistance
once broken acts as support. A
Morning Star signal at this point
should prompt profit taking on the
short side.Finally, let’s look at a weekly chart of MTNL
in Figure 12.7.
Figure 12.7: Candlestick signals on
MTNL’s weekly chart
The stock had been in an up trend from the
end of July till the start of January. A few
points to notice about the Bearish Haramithat formed at this point:
1. The Harami was confirmed with a
bearish candle the following week;
2. The close of this confirming candle was
below the up trend support line; and
3. The volume surged near the peak
indicating last gasp buying from the
bulls. This is a very good indication that
the trend is about to be reversed. It is a
simple point, no more buyers means
lower prices.
For a trader who went short on a break of the
up trend support line, a good place to exit the
position would have been after a string of
Doji were confirmed with a bullish candle inMarch.
As you can see, the candlestick signals work
the same in all time frames. For those
investors who are seeking to ride the bigger
trends and who do not have the time or
passion to monitor the markets often, using
weekly charts with candlestick signals
would be an ideal scenario. However,
remember that you still need to monitor the
markets once in a week. Spending this time
now monitoring your investments will
generate huge rewards later in life.
13
Conclusion
I have made a sincere effort to write a no-
nonsense book about trading using Japanese
candlestick signals. I wanted to include a lot
of history regarding the signals, but decided
otherwise. The history and the Japanese
nomenclature have no bearing on one’s
trading. The key is to understand the major
signals and use them effectively.
I would like to urge readers to re-read the
book until their eyes get visually trained to
recognize the various signal formations. Thisis because the signal recognition process
should be instantaneous. A minute or two can
then be spent analyzing the support-
resistance levels and stop loss levels. Soon
this entire process of finding potential
profitable trades will be second nature to
you. You will instantly know which charts
look “tradable”. Instead of trying to find
trades in all the charts, your experienced
eyes will visually select the most profitable
opportunities.
As mentioned before, it takes practice,
patience and dedication to become a
successful investor and trader. One of my
early mentors in candlestick trading had a
very good idea about practice trades. He
used to put on his usual 5 to 10 trades at atime. But, along with that, he also used to
paper trade another 5 to 10 trades. This is an
excellent way to test one’s knowledge and
get to know the market at the same time. If
you involve yourself only in paper trading,
you will be leaving out the key point — your
emotional interaction with the market!
Start your journey with a small, but real
position in the market. Then, as the profits
grow, so can your trade size.
Do not fall prey to those who say you cannot
time the market. With the right knowledge
and practical money management techniques,
you can reap huge rewards from any
investment instrument. Also remember that
you are not limited to trading only shares anymore. You can use candlestick signals for
trading currencies and commodities as well.
It is up to you to find your niche in the
market. Not all traders like to trade
everything. Some specialize in shares, some
in commodities and some in currencies. You
now have a powerful tool to use in
whichever market you find comfortable.
From now on, the market will look less
chaotic to you. Though you cannot control the
ups and the downs of the market, you will be
able to take advantage of the swings. I would
highly recommend the readers to get
proficient in playing both sides (long and
short) of the markets. Many traders develop
a liking to trading to only the upside. Some
are under the wrong impression that shortingstocks is dangerous. With proper stop loss
procedures, the risk in going short is the
same as in going long. Traders who trade
only side miss out when the markets are
correcting, which inevitably happens. There
is no difference as far as candlestick trading
is concerned. This book has thoroughly
discussed the candlestick sell signals and the
readers should take advantage of them. Once
you get fluent playing both sides, there will
never be a dull moment in the market for you.
It is a big world out there with billions of
rupees trading hands every day. It is my
innermost belief that this book can help you
put some of that abundance in your pocket!
Happy wealth building!Appendix: Important Candle
Signals - A Ready Reckoner
HammerThe lower
shadow
must be at
least twice
the size of
the body
length.
There
should be
no upper
shadow or
a very
small
upper
shadow.
The colour
of the
body does
not matter,
but a white
body
would be
more
positive
than a
black
body.Inverted
HammerThe upper
shadow
must be at
least twice
the size of
the body
length.
There
should be
no lower
shadow or
a very
small
lower
shadow.
The colour
of the
body does
not matter,
but a white
body
would be
more
positive
than a
black
body.
Bullish
EngulfingThe
second
day of the
signal
should be
a white
candle
opening
below the
Close of
the
previous
day and
closing
above the
Open of
the
previous
day’s
black
candle.
Piercing
SignalThe
second
day of the
signalshould be
a white
candle
opening
below the
trading
range of
the
previous
day and
closing at
least half
way into
the body
of the
previous
day’s dark
candle.
Bullish
HaramiThe
second
day of the
signal
should be
white and
the body
should be
completely
engulfed
by the
previous
day’s
black
candle
body.
MorningThe firstStar day of the
signal
must be a
long dark
body. The
second
day must
be a day of
indecision.
The third
day should
be a long
white
candle
reaching at
least
halfway
into the
body of
the first
day’s dark
candle.
Bullish
KickerThe first
day of the
signal
must be a
long black
body. The
second
day must
be a long
white
candle
opening
above the
open of the
previous
day. An
ideal
Bullish
Kicker
will have
a GAP
between
the two
candles.
© Profitable Candlestick Charting, LLCImportant Candle Signals - A
Ready Reckoner
Hanging
ManThe lower
shadow
must be at
least twice
the size of
the body
length.
There
should be
no upper
shadow or
a very
small
upper
shadow.
The colour
of the
body does
not matter,
but a dark
body
would be
more
positive
than a
white
body.
Shooting
StarThe upper
shadow
must be at
least twice
the size of
the body
length.
There
should be
no lower
shadow or
a very
small
lower
shadow.
The colour
of the
body does
not matter,
but a dark
body
would be
morepositive
than a
white
body.
Bearish
EngulfingThe
second
day of the
signal
should be
a black
candle
opening
above the
Close of
the
previous
day and
closing
below the
Open of
the
previous
day’s
white
candle.
Dark
cloud
CoverThe
second
day of the
signal
should be
a dark
candle
opening
above the
trading
range of
the
previous
day and
closing at
least half
way into
the body
of the
previous
day’s
white
candle.
Bearish
HaramiThe
second
day of thesignal
should be
black and
the body
should be
completely
engulfed
by the
previous
day’s
white
candle
body.
EveningThe firstStar day of the
signal
must be a
long white
body. The
second
day must
be a day of
indecision.
The third
day should
be a long
dark
candle
reaching
down at
least
halfway
into the
body of
the first
day’s
white
candle.
Bearish
KickerThe first
day of the
signal
must be a
long white
body. The
second
day must
be a long
dark
candle
opening
below the
open of the
previous
day. An
ideal
Bearish
Kicker
will have
a GAP
between
the two
candles.
© Profitable Candlestick Charting, LLC