 
 
THE MARKET WIZARDS 
 
CONVERSATIONS WITH 
AMERICA'S TOP TRADERS 
JACK  D. S CHWAGER  
 
 
  2HarperBusiness 
 
 
 
You've got to learn how to fall, before you learn to fly. 
—Paul Simon 
 
One man's ceiling is another man's floor. 
—Paul Simon 
 
If I wanted to become a tramp, I would seek info rmation and advice from the most successful tramp 
I could find. If I wanted to become a failure , I would seek advice from men who had never 
succeeded. If I wanted to succeed in all thin gs, I would look around me for those who are 
succeeding and do as they have done. 
—Joseph Marshall Wade 
(as quoted in a Treasury of Wall Street Wisdom  
edited by Harry D. Schultz and Samson Coslow) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  3Contents 
 
Preface........................................................................................................................ ........................... 4 
Acknowledgments ................................................................................................................ ................ 5 
Prologue ....................................................................................................................... ......................... 6 
My Own Story ................................................................................................................... ................... 7 
Part I-Futures and Currencies .................................................................................................. ......... 9 
Taking the Mystery Out of Futures.............................................................................................. ........ 10 
The Interbank Currency Market Defined.......................................................................................... ...11 
Michael Marcus - Blighti ng Never Strikes Twice ............................................................................... 12 
Bruce Kovner-The World Trader.................................................................................................. .......31 
Richard Dennis-A Legend Retires................................................................................................ .......46 
Paul Tudor Jones-The Art of Aggressive Trading............................................................................... 60 
Gary Bielfeldt-Yes, They Do Trade T-Bonds in Peoria ...................................................................... 71 
Ed Seykota-Everybody Gets What They Want ................................................................................... 76 
Larry Hite-Respecting Risk ..................................................................................................... ............ 87 
Part II-Mostly Stocks.......................................................................................................... ............... 95 
Michael Steinhardt-The Concep t of Variant Perception...................................................................... 96 
William O'Neil-The Art of Stock Selection...................................................................................... .108 
David Ryan-Stock Investment as a Treasure Hunt............................................................................ 117 
Marty Schwartz-Champion Trader ................................................................................................. ...125 
Part III-A Little Bit of Everything ............................................................................................ .....138 
James B. Rogers, Jr.-Buying Value and Selling Hysteria.................................................................. 139 
Mark Weinstein-High-Percentage Trader.......................................................................................... 156 
Part IV-The View from the Floor................................................................................................ ...166 
Brian Gelber-Broker Turned Trader .............................................................................................. ....168 
Tom Baldwin-The Fearless Pit Trader............................................................................................ ...178 
Tony Saliba-"One-Lot" Triumphs* ................................................................................................ ...186 
Part V-The Psychology of Trading............................................................................................... ..195 
Dr. Van K. Tharp-The Psychology of Trading.................................................................................. 196 
The Trade-A Personal Experience ................................................................................................ .206 
Postscript-Dreams and Trading .................................................................................................. ...209 
Final Word..................................................................................................................... ................... 211 
Appendix 1-Program Trading and Portfolio Insurance............................................................... 213 
Appendix 2 - Options—Understanding the Basics* ..................................................................... 214 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  4Preface  
 
There are some amazing stories here: 
A trader who, after wiping out several times early  in his career, turned a $30,000 account into $80 
million A fund manager who achieved what many t hought impossible—five consecutive years of 
triple-digit percentage returns A trader from sm all-town America who star ted out on a shoestring 
and has become one of the world's largest bond trad ers A former securities analyst who, during the 
past seven years, has realized an average monthly return of 25 percent (over 1,400 percent 
armualized), primarily trading stock index futu res An electrical engineering graduate from МГГ  
whose largely computerized approach to tr ading has earned his accounts an astounding 250,000 
percent return over a sixteen-year period. 
These are but a sampling of the interviews cont ained in this book. In his own way, each of the 
traders interviewed has achieved incredible success. 
What sets these traders apart? Most people think that winning in the markets has something to do 
with finding the secret formula. The truth is  that any common denomin ator among the traders I 
interviewed had more to do with attitude than approach. Some of the traders use fundamental 
analysis exclusively, others empl oy only technical analysis, and still others combine the two. Some 
traders operate on a time horizon measured in hours or even minutes, while others typically 
implement positions that they intend to hold for months or even years. Although the trading 
methodologies varied widely, the forthcoming interv iews reveal certain im portant commonalities in 
trading attitudes and principles. 
Trading provides one of the last great frontiers of  opportunity in our economy. It is one of the very 
few ways in which an individual can start with a relatively small bankroll and actually become a 
multimillionaire. Of course, only a handful of individuals (such as those interviewed here) succeed 
in turning this feat, but at least the opportunity exists. 
While I hardly expect all readers of this book to  transform themselves into super-traders—the 
world just doesn't work that way—I believe that  these thought-provoking inte rviews will help most 
serious and open-minded readers improve their pers onal trading performance. It may even help a 
select few become super-traders. 
Jack D. Schwager  
Goldens Bridge, NY 
May 1989 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  5Acknowledgments  
First and foremost, I would like to  thank Stephen Chronowitz, who por ed over every chapter in this 
book and provided a multitude of helpful suggestions  and editing changes. I am indebted to Steve 
for both the quantity (hours) and quality of his input. I truly believe that whatever the merits of this 
work, it has benefited significan tly from his contributions. 
I am grateful to my wife, Jo Arm, not only for enduring nine months as a "book widow," but also 
for being a valuable sounding board—a role she performed with brutal honesty. Sample: "This is 
the worst thing you ever wrote!" (Needless to say, that item was excised from the book.) Jo Arm 
possesses common sense in abundance, and I us ually followed her advice unquestioningly. 
Of course, I would like to expre ss my thanks to all the traders who agreed to be interviewed, 
without whom there would be no book. By and larg e, these traders neither need nor seek publicity, 
as they trade only for their own accounts or are already managing al l the money they wish to. In 
many cases, their motives for participating were altr uistic. For example, as one trader expressed it, 
"When I was starting out, I found biographies and interviews of successful  traders particularly 
helpful, and I would like to play a similar role in helping new traders." 
I wish to express my sincere appreciation to El aine Crocker for her friendly persuasion, which 
made some of the chapters in th is book possible. For advice, lead s, and other assorted favors, I 
would like to thank Courtney Smith, Norm Zadeh, Susan Abbott, Bruce Babcock, Martin Presler, 
Chuck Carlson, Leigh Stevens, Brian Gelber, Michael Marcus, and William Rafter. Finally, I 
would like to thank three traders who were graci ous enough to grant me lengthy interviews, which 
were not incorporated in to this book: Irv Kessler, Doug Redm ond, and Martin Presler (the former 
two because, in retrospect, I considered my line of  questioning too esoteric and technical; the latter 
because publication deadlines did not permit time for needed follow-up interviews and editing). 
  6Prologue  
The name of the book was The Big Board. . . . It was about an Eart h-ling man and woman who 
were kidnapped by extraterrestrial s. They were put on display in a zoo on a planet called Zircon-
212. 
These fictitious people in the zoo had a big board  supposedly showing stock market quotations and 
commodity prices along one wall of their habitat,  and a news ticker, and a telephone that was 
supposedly connected to a brokerage on Earth. The cr eatures on Zircon-212 told  their captives that 
they had invested a million dollars for them back  on Earth, and that it was up to the captives to 
manage it so that they would be fabulously we althy when they were returned to Earth. 
The telephone and the big board and the ticker we re all fakes, of course. They were simply 
stimulants to make the Earthlings perform vividl y for the crowds at the zoo—to make them jump 
up and down and cheer, or gloat, or sulk, or tear th eir hair, to be scared shitless or to feel as 
contented as babies in their mothers' arms. 
The Earthlings did very well on paper. That was part of the rigging, of course. And religion got 
mixed up in it, too. The news ticker reminded them  that the President of the United States had 
declared National Prayer Week, and that ever ybody should pray. The Earthlings had had a bad 
week on the market before that. They had lost a sm all fortune in olive oil futures. So they gave 
praying a whirl. It worked. Olive oil went up. 
—Kurt Vonnegut Jr. Slaughterhouse Five  
If the random walk theorists are correct, then Earthbound traders are suffering from the same 
delusions as the zoo inhabitants of Kilgore Trout's novel. (Kilgore Trout is the ubiquitous science 
fiction writer in Kurt Vonnegut 's novels.) Whereas the prisoners  on Zircon-212 thought their 
decisions were being based on actual price quotes —they were not—real-life traders believe they 
can beat the market by their acumen or skill. If markets are truly efficient and random in every time 
span, then these traders are attri buting their success or failure to their own skills or shortcomings, 
when in reality it is all a matter of luck. 
After interviewing the traders for this book, it is hard to believe th is view of the world. One comes 
away with a strong belief that it is highly unlikely that some trader s can win with such consistency 
over vast numbers of trades and many years. Of  course, given enough trader s, some will come out 
ahead even after a long period of ti me, simply as a consequence of the laws of probability. I leave it 
for the mathematicians to determine the odds of traders winning by the magn itude and duration that 
those interviewed here have. Inci dentally, the traders themselves have not a glimmer of doubt that, 
over the long run, the question of who wins and who loses is determined by skill, not luck. I, too, 
share this conviction.  7My Own Story  
Right out of graduate school, I la nded a job as a commodity resear ch analyst. I was pleasantly 
surprised to find that my economic  and statistical analysis correc tly predicted a number of major 
commodity price moves. It was not long thereafte r that the thought of tr ading came to mind. The 
only problem was that my departme nt generally did not permit analysts to trade. I discussed my 
frustration over this situation w ith Michael Marcus (first interv iew), with whom I became friends 
while interviewing for the research position he was vacating. Michael said, "You know, I had the 
same problem when I worked th ere. You should do what I did—open an account at another firm." 
He introduced me to a broker at his ne w firm, who was willing to open the account. 
At the time, I was earning less than  the department secretary, so I didn't exactly have much risk 
capital. I had my brother open a $2,000 account for wh ich I acted as an advisor. Since the account 
had to be kept secret, I could not call in any orders from my desk. Every time I wanted to initiate or 
liquidate a position, I had to take the elevator to  the building's basement to use the public phone. 
(Marcus' solution to the same problem is discussed in his interview.) The worst part of the situation 
was not merely the delays in order entry, which we re often nerve-wracking, but  the fact that I had 
to be very circumspect about the number of times  I left my desk. Sometimes, I would decide to 
delay an order until the following morning in  order to avoid «rearing any suspicion. 
I don't remember any specifics about my first few trad es. All I recall is that, on balance, I did only a 
little better than break even after paying commissions . Then came the first trade that made a lasting 
impression. I had done a very deta iled analysis of th e cotton market throughout the entire post-
World War П period. I discovered that because of a va riety of government s upport programs, only 
two seasons since 1953 could truly be termed free markets [markets in which prices were 
determined by supply and demand rather than the prevailing gove rnment program]. I correctly 
concluded that only these two seas ons could be used in forecasting prices. Unfortunately, I failed to 
reach the more significant conclusion that existi ng data were insufficient to permit a meaningful 
market analysis. Based on a comparison with these two seasons, I inferred th at cotton prices, which 
were then trading at 25 cen ts per pound, would move higher, but peak around 32-33 cents. 
The initial part of the forecast proved correct as cotton prices e dged higher over a period of months. 
Then the advance accelerated and cotton jumped from 28 to 31 cents in a single week. This latest 
rally was attributed to some news I considered rather unimportant. "Close enough to my projected 
top," I thought, and I decided to go short. Thereafter, the market moved sli ghtly higher and then 
quickly broke back to the 29-cent level. This seemed  perfectly natural to me, as I expected markets 
to conform to my analysis. My profits and elation were  short-lived, however, as cotton prices soon 
rebounded to new highs and then moved unrelentingly higher: 32 cents, 33 cents, 34 cents, 35 
cents. Finally, with my account equity wiped out, I was forced to liquidate the position. Not having 
much money in those days may have been one of  my luckiest breaks, since cotton eventually 
soared to an incredible level of 99 cents—more than double the century's previous high price! 
That trade knocked me out of the box for a while. Ov er the next few years, I again tried my hand at 
trading a couple of times. In each instance, I started with not much more than $2,000 and 
eventually wiped out because of a single large loss.  My only consolation was that the amounts I lost 
were relatively small. 
Two things finally broke this pa ttern of failure. First, I met Steve Chronowitz. At the time, I was 
the commodity research director at  Hornblower & Weeks, and I hire d Steve to fill a slot as the 
department's precious metals analyst. Steve and I shared the same office, and we quickly became 
good friends. In contrast to myself, a pure fundamen tal analyst, Steve' s approach to the markets 
was strictly technical. (The funda mental analyst uses economic data  to forecast prices, while the 
technical analyst employs internal  market data—such as price, vo lume, and sentiment—to project 
prices.) 
Until that time, I had viewed technical analysis with great skepticism. I tended to doubt that 
anything as simple as chart reading could be of any value. Working closely with Steve, however, I 
began to notice that his market calls were ofte n right. Eventually, I became convinced that my 
initial assessment of technical an alysis was wrong. I realized that, at least for myself, fundamental 
analysis alone was insufficient for successful trad ing; I also needed to incorporate technical  8analysis for the timing of trades. 
The second key element that finally put me into th e winner's column was the realization that risk 
control was absolutely essential to successful tr ading. I decided that I would never again allow 
myself to lose everything on a single trade—no matter how convinced I wa s of my market view. 
Ironically, the trade that I consider  my turning point and one of my best trades ever was actually a 
loss. At the time, the Deutsche mark had carved out a lengthy trading range following an extended 
decline. Based on my market anal ysis, I believed that the Deutsche mark was forming an important 
price base. I went long within the consolidation,  simultaneously placing a good-till-cancelled stop 
order just below the recent low. I reasoned that if I was right, the market should not fall to new 
lows. Several days later, the market started fa lling and I was stopped out of my position at a small 
loss. The great thing was that after I was stoppe d out, the market plummeted like a stone. In the 
past, this type of trade would have wiped me out; instead, I suffered only a minor loss. 
Not long thereafter, I became bullish on the Japanese  yen, which had formed a technically bullish 
consolidation, providing a meani ngful close point to place a protective stop. While I normally 
implemented only a one-contract pos ition, the fact that I felt reasonably able to define my risk at 
only 15 ticks per contract—t oday, I find it hard to believe that I was able to get away with that 
close a stop—allowed me to put on a three-c ontract position. The market never looked back. 
Although I ended up getting out of that position far too early, I held one of  the contracts long 
enough to triple my small account size. That was the start of my success at trading. Over the next 
few years, the synthesis of technical and fundament al analysis combined with risk control allowed 
me to build my small stake into well over $100,000. 
Then the streak ended. I found myse lf trading more impulsively, fa iling to follow the rules I had 
learned. In retrospect, I believe I had just become too cocky. In particular, I remember a losing 
trade in soybeans. Instead of taking my loss when the market moved against me, I was so 
convinced that the decline was a reaction in a bull market that I substantially increased my position. 
The mistake was compounded by taking this action in  front of an important government crop 
report. The report came out bearish, and my equity took a dramatic decline. In a matter of days, I 
had surrendered over one-quarter  of my cumulative profits. 
After cashing in my chips to buy a house and la ter taking a yearlong sabba tical to write a book,* 
my savings were sufficiently depleted  to defer my reentry into tradin g for nearly five years. When I 
began trading again, typical to my usual custom, I started with a small amount: $8,000. Most of this 
money was lost over the course of a year. I added another $8,000 to the account and, after some 
further moderate setbacks, eventually scored a few big winning trades. Within about two years, I 
had once again built my trading account up to over $100,000. I subsequently stalled out, and during 
the past year, my account equity has fluctuated below this peak. 
Although, objectively, my trading has been successful, on an emotional level, I often view it with a 
sense of failure. Basically, I feel that given my  market knowledge and experience, I should have 
done better. "Why," I ask myself, "have I been ab le to multiply a sub-$ 10,000 account more than 
tenfold on two occasions, yet unable to expand the equity much beyond that level, let alone by any 
multiples?" 
A desire to find the answers was one  of my motivations for writing this book. I wanted to ask those 
traders who had already succeeded: What are the key elements to your success? What approach do 
you use in the markets? What trading rules do you adhere to? What were your own early trading 
experiences? What advice would you give to other traders? 
While, on one level, my search for answers was a personal quest to help surpass my own barriers, 
in a broader sense, I saw myself as Everyman, asking the questions I thought others would ask if 
given the opportunity. 
* JackD.Schwager, A Complete Guide to the Futures Markets (John Wiley& Sons, New York, NY, 
1984).  9Part I-Futures and Currencies  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  10Taking the Mystery Out of Futures 
Of all the markets discussed in this book, the future s market is probably th e one least understood by 
most investors. It is also one of the fastest growing. Trading volume in futures has expanded more 
than twentyfold during the past twenty years. In 1988, the dollar value of all futures contracts 
traded in the U.S. exceeded $10 tr illion!* Obviously, there is a lot more than pork belly trading 
involved here. 
Today's futures markets encompass all of the worl d's major market groups: interest rates (e.g., T-
bonds), stock indexes (e.g., the S&P 500), currencies (e.g., Japanese yen), pr ecious metals (e.g., 
gold), energy (e.g., crude oil), and agricultural commodities (e.g., corn). Although the futures 
markets had their origins in agri cultural commodities, this sector now acc ounts for only about one-
fifth of total futures trading. During the past decade, the introduc tion and spectacular growth of 
many new contracts has resulted in the financial-type markets (currenc ies, interest rate instruments, 
and stock indexes) accounting for approximately 60 percent 
*This is a rough but conservative estimate base d on 246 million contracts traded and assuming an 
average contract value well over $40,000. (Excluding short-term intere st rate futures, such as 
Eurodollars, single contract values ranged from about $11,000 for sugar at Ю0ДЬ. to $150,000 for 
the S&P 500 at an index value of 300.) of all futures trading. (Energy and metal markets account 
for nearly half of the remaining 40 percent.) Th us, while the term commodities is often used to 
refer to the futures markets, it has increasing ly become a misnomer. Many of the most actively 
traded futures markets, such as those in the fina ncial instruments, are not truly commodities, while 
many commodity markets have no corresponding futures markets. 
The essence of a futures market is in its name: Trading involves a standardized contract for a 
commodity, such as gold, or a financial instrument , such as T-bonds, for a fu ture delivery date, as 
opposed to the present time. For ex ample, if an automobile manufacturer needs copper for current 
operations, it will buy its materials directly from  a producer. If, however, the same manufacturer 
was concerned that copper prices  would be much higher in six m onths, it could approximately lock 
in its costs at that time by buying c opper futures now. (This offset of future price risk is called a 
hedge.) If copper prices climbed during the interim, the profit on the futures hedge would 
approximately offset the higher co st of copper at the time of actua l purchase. Of c ourse, if copper 
prices declined instead, the futu res hedge would result in a loss,  but the manufacturer would end up 
buying its copper at lower levels than it was willing to lock in. 
While hedgers, such as the above automobile manuf acturer, participate in futures markets to reduce 
the risk of an adverse price move, traders particip ate in an effort to profit from anticipated price 
changes. In fact, many traders will prefer the futu res markets over their cash  counterparts as trading 
vehicles for a variety of reasons: 
1. Standardized contracts —Futures contracts are standardized (in terms of quantity and quality); 
thus, the trader does not have to find a specific buye r or seller in order to initiate or liquidate a 
position. 
2. Liquidity —All of the major futures markets provide excellent liquidity. 
3. Ease of going short —The futures markets allow equal ease  of going short as well as long. For 
example, the short seller in the stock market (who is actually borrowing stock to sell) must wait for 
an uptick,  before initiating a position; no such  restriction exists in the futures markets. 
4. Leverage —The futures markets offer tremendous le verage. Roughly speaking, initial margin 
requirements are usually equal to 5 to 10 per cent of th e contract value. (T he use of the term margin 
in the futures market is unfortuna te because it leads to tremendous  confusion with the concept of 
margins in stocks. In the futures markets, marg ins do not imply partial payments, since no actual 
physical transaction occurs until the expiration  date; rather, margins are basically good-faith 
deposits.) Although high leverage is one of the attrib utes of futures markets for traders, it should be 
emphasized that leverage is a tw o-edged sword. The undisciplined us e of leverage is the single 
most important reason why most tr aders lose money in the futures markets. In general, futures 
prices are no more volatile than  the underlying cash prices or, for that matter, many stocks. The 
high-risk reputation of futures is largel y a consequence of th e leverage factor. 
5. Low transaction costs —Futures markets provide very low tran saction costs. For example, it is  11far less expensive for a stock portfolio manager to  reduce market exposure by selling the equivalent 
dollar amount of stock index futures cont racts than by selling individual stocks. 
6. Ease of offset —A futures position can be offset at any time during market hours, providing 
prices are not locked at limit-up or limitdown. (S ome futures markets specify daily maximum price 
changes. In cases in which free market forces w ould normally seek an equilibrium price outside the 
range of boundaries implied by price limits, the mark et will simply move to the limit and virtually 
cease to trade.) 
7. Guaranteed by exchange —The futures trader does not have to be concerned about the financial 
stability of the person on the other side of the tr ade. All futures transactions are guaranteed by the 
clearinghouse of the exchange. 
Since by their very structure, futures are closely ti ed to their underlying ma rkets (the activity of 
arbitrageurs assures that deviati ons are relatively minor and short liv ed), price moves in futures will 
very closely parallel those in the corresponding cash markets. Keepi ng in mind that the majority of 
futures trading activity is concentrated in financia l instruments, many futures traders are, in reality, 
traders in stocks, bonds, and cu rrencies. In this context, the comments of futures traders 
interviewed in the following chapters have dir ect relevance even to i nvestors who have never 
ventured beyond stocks and bonds. 
 
The Interbank Currency Market Defined 
The interbank currency market is a twenty-four- hour market which literally follows the sun around 
the world, moving from banking cente rs in the U.S. to Australia, to the Far East, to Europe, and 
finally back to the U.S. The market exists to fill the need of companies to hedge exchange risk in a 
world of rapidly fluctua ting currency values. For example, if a Japanese electronics manufacturer 
negotiates an export sale of stereo equipment to the U.S. with payment in dollars to be received six 
months hence, that manufacturer is vulnerable to a depreciation of the dolla r versus the yen during 
the interim. If the manufacturer wants to assure a fixed price in the local cu rrency (yen) in order to 
lock in a profit, he can hedge himself by selling the equivalent amount of  U.S. dollars in the 
interbank market for the antici pated date of payment. The ba nks will quote the manufacturer an 
exchange rate for the precise amount re quired, for the specific future date. 
Speculators trade in the interbank currency market in  a n  e f f o r t  t o  p r o f i t  from their expectations 
regarding shifts in exchange rates. For exampl e, a speculator who anticipated a decline in the 
British pound against the dollar would simply sell forward British pounds. (All transactions in the 
interbank market are denominated in U.S. dollars .) A speculator who exp ected the British pound to 
decline versus the Japanese yen would buy a specifi c dollar amount of Japanese yen and sell an 
equivalent dollar amount of British pounds. 
  12Michael Marcus - Blighting Never Strikes Twice 
Michael Marcus began his career as a commodity research analyst for a major brokerage house. His 
near-compulsive attraction to trading led him to abandon his salaried position to pursue full-time 
trading. After a brief, almost co mical, stint as a floor trader, he  went to work for Commodities 
Corporation, a firm that hired professional tr aders to trade the company's own funds. Marcus 
became one of their most successful traders. In a number of years, his profits exceeded the 
combined total profit of all the other traders. Over a ten-year period, he multiplied his company 
account by an incredible 2,500-fold! 
I first met Marcus the day I join ed Reynolds Securities as a future s research analyst. Marcus had 
accepted a similar job at a competing firm, and I wa s assuming the position he had just vacated. In 
those early years in both our careers, we met regularly. Although I usually found my own analysis 
more persuasive when we disagreed, Marcus u ltimately proved right about the direction of the 
market. Eventually, Marcus accepted a job as a tr ader, became very successful, and moved out to 
the West Coast. 
When I first conceived the idea for this book, Marc us was high on my list of interview candidates. 
Marcus' initial response to my request was agreeable,  but not firm. Several weeks later, he declined, 
as his desire to maintain anonymity domina ted his natural inclination to participate Ь an endeavor 
he found appealing. (Marcus knew a nd respected many of the other traders I was interviewing.) I 
was very disappointed because Marcus is one of th e finest traders I have been privileged to know. 
Fortunately, some additional persuasion by a mutual friend helped change his mind. 
When I met Marcus for this interview, it had been  seven years since we had last seen each other. 
The interview was conducted in Marcus' home, a two-house complex set on a cliff overlooking a 
private beach in Southern California. You ente r the complex through a massive gate ("amazing 
gate" as described by an assistant who provided me  with driving directi ons) that would probably 
have a good chance of holding up th rough a panzer division attack. 
On first greeting, Marcus seemed aloof, almost w ithdrawn. This quiet side of Marcus' personality 
makes his description of his short- lived attempt to be a floor trader  particularly striking. He became 
animated, however, as soon as he  began talking about his trading experience s. Our conversation 
focused on his early "roller coaster"  years, which he considered to be the most inte resting of his 
career. 
How did you first get interested in trading futures? 
I was something of a scholar. In  1969, I graduated from Johns Hopkins, Phi Beta Kappa, near the 
top of my class. I had a Ph.D. fellowship in psyc hology at Clark University, and fully expected to 
live the life of a professor. Th rough a mutual friend, I met this fellow named John, who claimed he 
could double my money every two weeks, like clockwork. That sounded very appealing [he 
laughs]. I don't think I even asked John how he coul d do it. It was such an attractive idea that I 
didn't want to spoil things by finding out too ma ny facts. I was afraid I would get cold feet. 
Weren't you skeptical? Didn't he sound too much like a used car salesman? 
No, I had never invested in anything, and I was ve ry naive. I hired John, who was a junior at my 
school, to be my commodity trading advisor at $30 a week. Occasionally, I threw in free potato 
chips and soda. He had a theory th at you could subsist on that diet. 
That's all you paid him? Weren't there any prof it incentives—extra potato chips if he did 
well? 
No. 
How much money did you  allot for trading? 
About $1,000 that I had saved up.  
Then what happened? 
My first trip to a brokerage house was very, very exciting. I got dressed up, putting on my only suit, 
and we went to the Reynolds Securities office in Baltimore. It was a big, posh office, suggesting a 
lot of old money. There was mahogany all over the place and a hushed, reverential tone permeated 
the office. It was all very impressive.  13The focal point was a big commodity board at the fr ont of the office, the ki nd that clicked the old-
fashioned way. It was really exciting to hear th e click, click, click. They had a gallery from which 
the traders could watch the board, but it was so far away that we had to use binoculars to see the 
prices. That was also very exciting, becau se it was just like wa tching a horse race. 
My first realization that things might become  a little scary was when a voice came over the 
loudspeaker recommending the purchase of soybean meal. I looked at John, expecting to see an 
expression of confidence and assurance on his fa ce. Instead, he looked at me and asked, "Do you 
think we should do it?" [he laughs]. It quickly da wned on me that John didn't know anything at all. 
I remember soybean meal was trading quietly: 78.30,78.40,78.30, 78.40. We put the order in, and 
as soon as we got the confirmation back, almost mystically, the prices started clicking down. As 
soon as it knew that I was in, th e market took that as a signal to  start descending. I guess I had good 
instincts even then, because I im mediately said to John, "We're not  doing too well, let's get out!" 
We lost about $100 on that trade. 
The next trade was in corn, and the same thi ng happened. John asked me whether we should do the 
trade. I said, "Well all right, let's try com." The outcome was the same. 
Did you know anything at all about what you were doing? Had you read anything about 
commodities or trading? 
No, nothing. 
Did you even know the contract sizes? 
No, we didn't. 
Did you know how much it was costing you per tick? 
Yes. 
Apparently, that was about the only thing you knew. 
Right. Our next trade, in wheat, didn't work either. After that, we went back to corn and that trade 
worked out better, it took us th ree days to lose our money. We  were measuring success by the 
number of days it took us to lose. 
Were you always getting out after about a $100 loss? 
Yes, although one trade lost almost $200.1 was down to about $500 when John came up with an 
idea that was "going to save the day." We woul d buy August pork bellies and sell February pork 
bellies because the spread was wider than the carrying charges [the total cost of taking delivery in 
August, storing, and redelivering in February]. He said we couldn't lose on that trade. 
I vaguely understood the idea and ag reed to the trade. That was the first time we decided to go out 
to lunch. All the other times we had been too busy scrutinizing the board, but  we thought this was a 
"can't lose" trade, so it was sa fe to leave. By the time we came back, I was just about wiped out. I 
remember this feeling of s hock, dismay, and incredulity. 
I will never forget the image of John—he was a very portly guy with thick, opaque glasses—going 
up to the quote board, pounding and shaking his fist  at it, and shouting, "Doesn't anyone want to 
make a guaranteed profit!" Later on, I learned that  August pork bellies were not deliverable against 
the February contract. The logic of th e trade was flawed in the first place. 
Had John ever traded before? 
No. 
So where did he come up with this story about doubling your money every two weeks? 
I don't know, but after that trade, I was wiped out. So I told John that, in light of what happened, I 
thought I knew as much as he did—which was nothi ng—and that I was going to  fire him. No more 
potato chips; no more diet soda. I'll never forg et his response. He told me, "You are making the 
greatest mistake of your life!" I asked him what he was going to  do. He said, "I am going to 
Bermuda to wash dishes to make a trading stak e. Then I am going to become a millionaire and 
retire." The thing that amused me was that he didn't say, "I'm going to Bermuda and take a job to 
make a trading stake." He was very specific; he was going to wash dishes to get his trading stake. 
What eventually happened to John?  14To this day, I have no idea. For all I know, he might oe living in  Bermuda as a millionaire because 
he washed dishes. 
After that, I managed to rustle up another $500 a nd placed a few silver trades. I wiped out that 
stake as well. My first eight trades, five with  John and three on my  own, were all losers. 
Did the thought ever enter your mind that maybe trading was not for you? 
No. I had always done well at school , so I figured it was just a quest ion of getting the knack of it. 
My father, who died when I was fifteen, had left $3,000 in life insurance, which I decided to cash 
in, despite my mother's objections. 
But I knew I really needed to learn something be fore trading again. I read Chester Keltner's books 
on wheat and soybeans, and I also subscribed to his market letter, which made trading 
recommendations. I followed the first recommenda tion, which was to buy wheat, and it worked. I 
think I made 4 cents per bushel [$200] on that tr ade. It was my first win and very exciting. 
Then between letters, the market fell back to my original buying pr ice, so I bought  it again and 
made another profit on my own. I felt I was beginning to develop a sense for trading. Even in the 
beginning, I liked the feeli ng of doing things on my  own. What happened next was just sheer luck. 
I bought three contracts of December corn in  the summer of 1970, based on a Keltner 
recommendation. That was the summer th at blight devastated the corn crop. 
Was that your first big win? 
Yes, that trade combined with buying some mo re com, wheat, and soybeans, partly on 
recommendations in the letter, and partly on my own intuition. When that glorious summer was 
over, I had accumulated $30,000, a princely sum to me, having come from a middle class family. I 
thought it was the best thing in the world. 
How did you decide when to take profits? 
I took some on the way up and some when the ma rkets started coming down. Overall, I cashed in 
very well. 
So instinctively, you were doin g the right thing even then? 
Yes. Then that fall I attended graduate school in Worcester, Massachusetts, but I found that I didn't 
want to think about my thesis. Instead of going to cl ass, I would often sn eak down to the Paine 
Webber office in Worcester to trade. 
I was having a great time. I made a little money, not a lot. I was shocked to find myself cutting 
classes frequently, since I had been a dedicated scholar at Johns Hopkins. I realized that the 
handwriting was on the wall, and in Decembe r 19701 dropped out of school and moved to New 
York. I stayed at the Y for a while. When people as ked me what I did, I rather pompously told them 
that I was a speculator. It had a nice ring to it. 
In the spring of 1971, the grains started getting interesting again. There was a theory around that 
the blight had wintered over—that is, it had surviv ed the winter and was going to attack the corn 
crop again. I decided I would be really positioned for the blight this time. 
Was this Keltner's theory, or just a market rumor? 
I think Keltner believed it too. I borrowed $20,000 from my mother, added it to my $30,000, and 
bet everything on the blight. I boug ht the maximum number of corn  and wheat contracts possible 
for $50,000 in margin. Initially, the markets held steady because there was enough fear of the blight 
to keep prices up. I wasn't maki ng money, but I wasn't losing it e ither. Then one day—I will never 
forget this—there was an article in the Wall Street Journal with the headline: "More Blight on the 
Floor of the Chicago Board of Trade Than in Mi dwest Cornfields" [he laughs]. The corn market 
opened sharply lower and fairly quickly went limit-down.  
[hi many futures markets, the maximum daily price change is restricted by a specified limit. Limit-
down refers to a decline of this ma gnitude, while limit-up refers to an equivalent gain. If, as in this 
case, the equilibrium price that would result from the interaction of free market forces lies below 
the limit-down price, then the market will lock limit-down [i.e., trading will virtually cease. 
Reason: there will be an  abundance of sellers, but virtually no willing buyers at th e restricted limit-
down price.]  15Were you watching the market collapse? 
Yes, I was in the brokerage office, watching the board as prices fell. 
Did you think of getting out on the way down  before the market wa s locked limit-down? 
I felt that I should get out, but I just watched. I was totally paralyzed. I was hoping the market 
would turn around. I watched and watched and then after it locked limit-dow n, I couldn't get out. I 
had all night to think about it, but  I really had no choice. I didn't have any more money and had to 
get out. The next morning, I liquidate d my entire position on the opening. 
Was the market sharply lo wer again on the opening? 
No, not sharply, just about 2 cents. 
How much did you lose on the tr ade by the time you liquidated? 
I lost my own $30,000, plus $ 12,000 of the $20,000 my mo ther had lent me. That was my lesson in 
betting my whole wad. 
What did you do then? 
I was really upset. I decided I had to go to work. Since there was a recession at the time, I thought I 
probably couldn't get a really good job and should tr y to settle for a lesser  position. I found that 
even though I interviewed for positions for which I was unusually well qualified, I couldn't seem to 
get any job. I finally realized th at I couldn't get these jobs becau se I didn't really want them. 
One of the best job openings I found was a commodity research analyst slot at  Reynolds Securities. 
I discovered that it was easier to get this better po sition because they could tell I really wanted it. I 
learned that if you shoot for what you want, you stand a much better chan ce of getting it because 
you care much more. 
Anyway, there was a glass partition betweenmy offi ce and the main office where the brokers sat. I 
still had the trading bug and it was very painful to watch them trading and whooping it up. 
While you were just doing the research? 
Right, because the analysts were st rictly forbidden to trade. But I decided I wouldn't let that stop 
me. I borrowed from my mother again, my brothe r, and my girlfriend and opened an account at 
another firm. I worked out an intricate code syst em with my broker to k eep people in my office 
from knowing that I was violating the rules. For ex ample, if I said, "the sun was out," that meant 
one thing, while if I said, "the weat her is cloudy," it meant something else. 
While I was trying to write my market reports, I ke pt peering out through the glass partition to see 
the prices on the big trading board  in the main office. When I was winning, I tried to hide my 
elation, and when I was losing, I had to make su re not to let it show on my face. I don't think 
anyone ever caught on, but I was in a manic-depre ssive state throughout that  time. I felt tortured 
because I wanted to be free to trade wit hout going through this elaborate charade. 
Were you making or losing money during this time? 
I lost. It was the same old cycle of bo rrowing money and cons istently losing it. 
Did you know what you were doing wrong then? 
Good question. Basically, I had no real grasp of trading principles; I was doing everything wrong. 
Then in October 1971, while at my broker's office, I met one of the people to  whom I attribute my 
success. 
Who was that? 
Ed Seykota. He is a genius and a great trader w ho has been phenomenally successful. When I first 
met Ed he had recently graduated from MIT and ha d developed one of the first computer programs 
for testing and trading technical systems. I still don't know how Ed amassed so much knowledge 
about trading at such an early age. 
Ed told me, "I think you ought to work here. We are starting a resear ch group and you can trade 
your own account." It sounde d great; the only problem was that th e firm's research director refused 
to hire me. 
Why? 
I couldn't imagine why since I wrote well and had experience. When I pressed him for a reason, he  16told me, "I can't hire you because you already know too much and I want to train somebody." I 
said, "Look, I will do anything you want." Ev entually, I convinced him to hire me. 
It was really great, because I had Ed to learn from, and he was alr eady a very successful trader. He 
was basically a trend follower, who utilized classic trading principl es. He taught me how to cut my 
losses, as well as the importance of riding winners. 
Ed provided an excellent role model. For example, one time, he was short silver and the market just 
kept eking down, a half penny a day, a penny a day. Everyone else seemed to be bullish, talking 
about why silver had to go up because it was so cheap, but Ed just stayed short. Ed said, "The trend 
is down, and I'm going to stay short until the tre nd changes." I learned patience from him in the 
way he followed the trend. 
Did Ed's example turn you around as a trader? 
Not initially. I continued to lose, even with Ed there. 
Do you remember what you were still doing wrong at that time? 
I think I wasn't patient enough to wa it for a clearly defined situation. 
Did you think of just tailcoating Ed, because he was so successful? 
No, I couldn't bring myself to do that. 
Did you ever think of just giving up on trading? 
I would sometimes think that maybe I ought to st op trading because it was very painful to keep 
losing. In "Fiddler on the Roof," there is a scene where the lead looks up and talks to God. I would 
look up and say, "Am I really that stupid?" And I seemed to hear a clear answer saying, "No, you 
are not stupid. You just have to keep at it." So I did. 
At the time, I was befriended by a very kind, know ledgeable, and successful  semiretired broker at 
Shearson named Amos Hostetter. He liked my writi ng, and we used to talk. Amos reinforced a lot 
of the things Ed taught me. I was getting the same principles from two people. 
Were you making recommendations for the firm at the time? 
Yes. 
And how did the recommendations work out? 
They were better because I was more patient. Anyway, I was tota lly out of money, and out of 
people who would lend me money.  But I still had a kind of st ubborn confidence that I could 
somehow get back on the right track again. I was only making $12,500  a year, but I managed to 
save $700. Since that wasn't even enough to open an account, I opened a joint account with a friend 
who also put up $700. 
Were you totally directing the tr ading in this joint account? 
Yes, my friend didn't know anything about the mark ets. This was in July 1972 and, at the time, we 
were under price controls. The futures market  was supposedly also under price controls. 
This was Nixon's price freeze? 
Yes. As I recall, the plywood pr ice was theoretically frozen at  $110 per 1,000 square feet. Plywood 
was one of the markets I analyzed for the firm. Th e price had edged up close to $110, and I put out 
a bearish newsletter saying even though supplie s were tight, since prices couldn't go beyond $110, 
there was nothing to lose by going short at $110. 
How did the government keep prices at the se t limits? What prevented supply and demand 
from dictating a higher price? 
It was against the law for prices to go higher. 
You mean producers couldn't charge more for it? 
Right. What was happening though was that the price was being kept artificially low,  and there is 
an economic principle that an artificially low pric e will create a shortage. So shortages developed in 
plywood, but supposedly  the futures market was al so under this gu ideline. However, no one was 
sure; it was sort of a gray area. One day, while I was looking at the quote board, the price hit $110. 
Then it hit $110.10; then $110.20. In other words, the futures price was trading 20 cents over the 
legal ceiling. So I started calling around to see what was going to happen, but nobody seemed to  17know. 
Was plywood the only market ex ceeding its price freeze level? 
Yes. Anyway, nothing happened. I think the mark et closed somewhere over $110 that day. The 
next day it opened at about $110.80.1 used the follo wing reasoning: If they let it trade over $110 
today, they might let it trade anywhere. So I bought one contract. Well, ultimately, plywood went 
to $200. After I bought that first contract, and pri ces rose, it was just a matter of pyramiding and 
riding the position. 
Was that your first really big trade after you  had been wiped out in the corn market? 
Yes. 
Did the cash plywood market stay at $110? 
The futures market functioned as  a supply of last resort to users who couldn't get supplies 
elsewhere. 
Basically, it created a two-tiered mark et, a sort of legal black market? 
Yes. Those who were frozen out because they didn't have any longstanding relationships with 
producers could get their plywood at a higher pri ce in the futures market. The producers were 
fuming at the thought that they had to sell at the legal price ceiling. 
Why didn't producers just sell futures and deliver against the contract as opposed to selling 
in the cash market at the price control level? 
The smarter ones were learning that, but it was the infancy of futures trading in plywood and most 
producers weren't that sophisticated. Some producers probably weren't sure that it was legal to do 
that. Even if they thought it was, their lawyer s might have told them, "Maybe people can buy 
plywood at any price in the futures market, but we better not sell and deliver above the legal 
ceiling." There were a lot of questions. 
Did the government ever try to int erfere with the futures markets? 
Well not exactly, but I will get b ack to that. In just a few m onths, $700 had grown into $12,000 
trading plywood. 
Was this the only trade you had on? 
Yes. Then I got the bright idea that the same shor tage situation was going to occur in lumber. I bet 
everything on one trade just as I had on the corn/wheat trade, expe cting that lumber would also go 
through the ceiling price. 
What was lumber doing at this time? 
It did nothing. It just watched plywood go from  $110 to $200. Since they were both wood products, 
and lumber was also in short supply, I reasone d that lumber could go way up—and it should have. 
However, after I bought lumber at around $130, the government finally woke up to what had 
happened in plywood, and they were determined not to let the same thing happen in lumber. 
The day after I went long, some government offi cial came out with an announcement that they 
were going to crack down on specul ators in lumber who were trying to ran up the market like they 
had ply wood. The lumber market crashed just on that statement. I was down to the point where I 
was close to being wiped out agai n. There was a two-week period du ring which they kept issuing 
these statements. The market stab ilized at a level just above wher e I would have been wiped out. I 
had just enough money left to hang on to my position. 
The market was at $130 when you boug ht it. Where was it at this time? 
About$117. 
So even though the magnitude of this declin e was much smaller than the price rise in 
plywood, you lost almost as much money because you had a much larger position in lumber 
than you had in plywood. 
Right. During those two weeks, I was constantly on the verge of being wiped out. It was the worst 
two weeks in my whole life. I went to the office each day just about ready to give up. 
Giving up just to stop the pain, or so that  you would at least have something left?  18Both. I was so upset that I couldn't stop my hands from shaking. 
How close did you come to being wiped out again? 
Well, my $12,000 had shrunk to under $4,000. 
Did you say to yourself, "I can't believe I have done this again"? 
Yes, and I never did it again. That was the last time I bet everything on one trade. 
What eventually happened? 
I managed to hold on, and the market finally turned around. There wa s a shortage, and the 
government didn't seem to have the will to stop the futures market. 
Was it insight or courage that gave you the willpower to hold on? 
Desperation, mainly, although there was a support point on the charts that the market couldn't seem 
to take out. So, I held on. At  the end of that year, the $700, wh ich I had ran up to over $ 12,000 and 
back to under $4,000, was now worth $24,000. After that scary experience, I never really 
overtraded again. 
The next year, 1973, the government began lifting the price controls. Because the price controls had 
created numerous artificial shortages, when they were lifted, there was a tremendous run-up in 
many commodities. Just about everyt hing went up. Prices doubled in  many markets, and I was able 
to take advantage of the tremendous leverage o ffered by low futures margins. The lessons I had 
learned from Seykota about staying in markets w ith major trends really paid off. In 1973, my 
account grew from $24,000 to $64,000. 
At that time, we were seeing something comp letely new. I remember those markets. Even 
after prices had gone up only 10 percent of their eventual advance, historically, it seemed like 
a very large price move. What made you realize that prices could go so much further? 
At the time, I was politically right wing and that fit with being an inflation-alarmist. The theory that 
the evil government was constantly debasing th e currency provided the perfect perspective for 
trading the inflationary markets of the mid-1970s. 
It was the right theory  for the right time. 
Right. The markets were so fertile for trading then that I could make plenty of mistakes and still do 
well. 
Trading strictly on the long side? 
Yes. Everything was going up. Although I was doing ve ry well, I did make one terrible mistake. 
During the great soybean bull mark et, the one that went from $3.25 to nearly $12,1 impulsively 
took my profits and got out of ever ything. I was trying to be fancy instead of st aying with the trend. 
Ed Seykota never would get out of  anything unless the trend change d. So Ed was in, while I was 
out, and I watched in agony as so ybeans went limit-up for twelve consecutive days. I was real 
competitive, and every day I would come into the office knowing he was in and I was out. I 
dreaded going to work, because I knew soybeans would be bid limit again and I couldn't get in. 
Was this experience of not being in a runaw ay market as aggravating as actually losing 
money? 
Yes, more so. It was so aggravating that one day I felt I couldn't take it anymore and I tried 
tranquilizers to dull the mental  anguish. When that didn't work, somebody said, "Why don't you 
take something stronger, called thorazine?" 
I remember taking this thorazine at home and th en getting on the subway  to go to work. The 
subway doors started to close as I was getting on and I started to fa ll down. At first,  I didn't connect 
it with the thorazine. Anyway, I wandered back  home and just fell through the doorway—it was 
that strong. It knocked me out and I missed work th at day. That was the low point in my trading 
career. 
You never threw in the towel and just went back into soybeans at some point? 
No, I was afraid of losing. 
Despite that mistake, you mentioned before  that you built your account up to $64,000 by 
year-end. What happened next?  19Around that time, I would occasionally have to go over to the Cotton Exchange. I would have an 
adrenalin rush when I heard the traders yelling and screaming. It seemed like the most exciting 
place in the world. But I learned that I needed to show $100,000 net worth to get in. Since I had 
virtually no assets outside of my commodity account , I couldn't qualify. I continued to make money 
in the markets, and after several months, I had surpassed the $100,000 mark. Around that same 
time, Ed Seykota recommended that I go long coffee.  So I did, but I put a close stop in under the 
market just in case it went down. The market  turned down and I was stopped out quickly. Ed, 
however, because he was a major trend follower, had no stop in a nd ended up being locked in a 
limit-down market for several days in succession. 
Each day, Seykota was locked in a losing position wh ile I was out of the market. That was the exact 
opposite situation of the soybean trade, when he was in a winning trade and I was out. I couldn't 
help it, but I felt a sense of joy. I asked myself, "What kind of a pl ace is this that one's greatest joy 
is to be found when somebody else is getting scre wed?" That was the point I realized that what I 
was doing was too competitive, and I decided to become a floor trader at the New York Cotton 
Exchange 
It sounds like the floor would h ave been even more competitive. 
Well, maybe, but it wasn't. 
Did you have any concern about being a floor  trader—the fact that you were now reducing 
your field of opportunity down to one market? 
I was a little concerned about it. As it turned out, I should have been very worried. However, the 
thought of trading in the ring was very exciting to me. The truth of the matter was that while I was 
very good at picking trades, I was a total bust at the execution part. I was very shy, and I was too 
timid to yell loud enough to make  myself heard on the floor. I e nded up slipping my orders to a 
floor trader friend of mine, who handled them for me. That went on for a few months until I 
realized what I was doing. 
Were you still approaching the markets as a po sition trader even thou gh you were on the 
floor? 
Yes, but it was just out of timidity. 
So, I assume that many days  you weren't even trading. 
Right. 
Was there any advantage to being on the floor? 
No, not for me. But I did learn a lot from the experience, and I would recommend it to anybody 
who wants to become a better trader. I used what I learned there for years. 
What type of things did you learn? 
You develop an almost subconscious sense of th e market on the floor. You learn to gauge price 
movement by the intensity of the voices in the ri ng. For example, when the market is active and 
moving, and then gets quiet, that is often a sign that it is not going to go much further. Also, 
sometimes when the ring is moderately loud and suddenly gets very loud, instead of being a sign 
that the market is ready to blast off, as you might  think, it actually indica tes that the market is 
running into a greater am ount of opposing orders. 
But how do you use that type of information once you are off the floor? You said that the 
things you learned on the floor helped you later on. 
I learned the importance of intraday chart points, such as  earlier daily highs. At  key intraday chart 
points, I could take much larger positions than  I could afford to hold, and if it didn't work 
immediately, I would get out quickly. For example, at a critical intraday point, I would take a 
twenty-contract position, instead of the three to five contracts I could a fford to hold, using an 
extremely close stop. The market either took off and ran, or I was out. Sometimes I would make 
300,400 points or more, with only a 10-point risk. That was because, by bei ng on the floor, I had 
become familiar with how the market responded to those intraday points. My  trading in those days 
was a little bit like being a surfer. I was trying to hit the crest of the wave just at the right moment. 
But if it didn't work, I just got out. I was getting a shot at making several hundred points and hardly  20risking anything. I later used that surfing tech nique as a desk trader. Although that approach 
worked real well then, I don't think it w ould work as well in today's markets. 
Is that because the markets have become choppier? 
Right. In those days, if the market reached an intr aday chart point, it might penetrate that point, 
take off, and never look back. Now it often comes back. 
So what is the answer? 
I think the secret is cutting dow n the number of trades you make. The best trades are the ones in 
which you have all three things go ing for you: fundamentals, technical s, and market tone. First, the 
fundamentals should suggest that there is an im balance of supply and de mand, which could result 
in a major move. Second, the chart must show that the market is moving in the direction that the 
fundamentals suggest. Third, when news comes out, th e market should act in a way that reflects the 
right psychological tone. For example, a bull ma rket should shrug off bearish news and respond 
vigorously to bullish news. If you can restrict your  activity to only those types of trades, you have 
to make money, in any market, under any circumstances. 
Is that more restrictive trading style the approach you eventually adopted? 
No, because basically I enjoyed th e game too much. I knew that I should only be in those optimum 
trades, but trading was a release and hobby for me. It replaced a lot of other things in my life. I 
placed the fun of the action ahead of my own criteria. However, th e thing that saved me was that 
when a trade met all my criteria, I would enter fi ve to six times the posi tion size I was doing on the 
other trades. 
Were all your profits coming from the trades that met the criteria? 
Yes. 
Were the other trades breaking even? 
The other trades broke even and kept me amused. 
Did you keep track of which were whic h so you knew what was going on? 
Just mentally. My goal on the other trades was ju st to break even. I knew that the big money was 
going to be made on the trades that  met my criteria. There will alwa ys be trades that meet those 
requirements, but there may be fewer of them , so you have to be much more patient. 
Why are there fewer such trades? Has the marketplace gotten more sophisticated? 
Yes. There are many more professional traders than in  my early days. In those years, I had an edge 
just by knowing the angles that  Ed Seykota and Amos Hostelle r laught me. Now everybody knows 
those principles. You have trading rooms filled with bright people and computers. 
In those days, you watched the board, and you would buy corn when it moved above a key chart 
point An hour later the grain el evator operator would gel a call fr om his broker and he mighl buy. 
The nexl day, Ihe brokerage house would recommend the trade, pushing the market up some more. 
On the third day, we would get short covering from the people that were wrong, and then some 
fresh buying from the dentists of the world, who fina lly got the word that il was the right time lo 
buy. Al that lime, I was one of the first ones lo  buy because I was one of the few professional 
traders playing the game. I would wind up sellin g out lo the dentists several days later. 
You're talking about short-term trades. Weren't you trading for the major moves? 
I traded some major moves, but ma ny times I would make my profits in two or three days in jusl 
that kind of trade. 
When did you get back in the market? 
Well, the dentisls weren'l going to keep their po sitions, since they were buying at the wrong time. 
So when the market would fall back, I would go b ack in. Nowadays, the mome nt the market breaks 
a key chart point, it is perceive d by a whole univers e of traders. 
So the lagged follow-up trades are no longer there? 
Right, the grain elevator operator has already bet.  The dentists don't count because their level of 
trading participation is infinitesimal.  21Is that because they now have their money invest ed with fund managers instead of trading by 
themselves? 
Right, and even if the dentists are still there, they are trading one-lots, which is a meaningless 
position when the fund managers are trading a t housand at a clip. Now you almost have to be 
contrary. You have to ask, "Isn't it true that all my fellow professi onal traders are already in, so who 
is left to buy?" You didn't have to worry about that be fore, because there was always somebody left 
to buy—the people who were getting the informati on or reacting slower. No w, everybody is just as 
decisive, just as fast. 
Are the markets more prone to false breakouts now? 
Yes, much more. 
Are trend-following systems th en doomed to mediocrity? 
I believe so. I believe that the era of trend follow ing is over until and unle ss there is a particular 
imbalance in a market that overrides everything  else. [The 1988 drought in the grain belt, which 
developed shortly after this interview, provides aper fect example of the type of exception Marcus is 
describing.] Another exception would be if we were  to enter a major infla tionary or deflationary 
environment. 
In other words, unless there is some very powerful force that can overwhelm everything else. 
Yes. 
 
Have the markets changed during the past five  to ten years because professional money 
managers now account for a much greater prop ortion of speculative trading activity, as 
opposed to the small speculators who tend to make all the mistakes? 
The markets have changed. The proof is that Ri chard Dennis, who has done well for many years, 
lost over 50 percent on the funds  he was managing in 1988. The tr end-following systems approach 
doesn't work anymore. The problem is that on ce you have defined a trend and taken a position, 
everyone else has taken a position as well. Since there is no one left to buy, the market swings 
around in the other dir ection and gets you out. 
One reason we don't have many good trends anym ore is that the centra l banks are preventing 
currency moves from getting out of hand by taking the other side of the trend. 
Haven't they always done that? 
I don't think so. If you look at a chart of treasur y debt held by foreign central banks, you will see 
that it has risen astrono mically during the last few years. The foreign banks seem to be taking over 
from private foreign investors in financing our trade debts. 
What do you think that means in terms of trading, and has your own trading style changed 
because of it? 
At one time, I traded heavily in currencies. For ex ample, in the years after Reagan was first elected 
and the dollar was very strong, I would take positions as large as 600 million Deutsche marks 
between my own account and the company acc ount. At the time, that was about $300 million 
worth. That was a pretty good line. I was probably one  of the bigger currency traders in the world, 
including the banks. 
It was very exhausting because it was a twenty-f our-hour market. When I went to sleep, I would 
have to wake up almost every two hours to check the markets. I w ould tune in every major center 
as it opened: Australia, Hong Kong,  Zurich, and London. It killed my  marriage. Nowadays, I try to 
avoid the currencies, because I feel it is a totally politic al situation; you have to determine what the 
central banks are going to do. 
When you were trading the currencies active ly, were you getting up through the night 
because you were worried about getting caught on  the wrong side of a major move before the 
markets opened in the U.S.? 
Yes. 
Did you always trade that way, or did you ge t caught enough times so that you started  22trading around the clock? 
It happened enough times to make me leery. 
There would be a big gap move that you could have avoided by trading overseas? 
That is right. For example, I remember one tim e, during late 1978, the do llar was getting battered, 
falling to new lows every day. This was during a period when I was cooperating and trading as a 
colleague with Brace Kovner. We used to talk hours every day. On e day, we noticed that the dollar 
got mysteriously strong. There was an intense pr ice movement that couldn't be explained by any 
known information. We just bailed out of our l ong currency positions lik e crazy. That weekend, 
President Carter announced a dollar support program. If we had waited until the next U.S. trading 
session, we would have been annihilated. 
That situation illustrates one of the principles we believed in— namely, that the big players, 
including the governments, would al ways tip their hand. If we saw a surprise price m ove against us 
that we didn't understand, we often got  out and looked for the reason later. 
I remember that market well. The currency futures markets were lo cked limit-down for 
several days in a row after that announcement.  You must have gotten out right near the top 
of that market. 
We made a great exit on that trad e. Anyway, my point is  that I believe, as a courtesy, the European 
central banks are no tified about major changes we are going to make, and they often act ahead of 
U.S. policy announcements. Consequently, the price m ove shows up in Europe first, even if it is 
because of something we initiate . If it's an action initiated by th e Europeans, the price move is 
certainly going to occur there first. I think the be st hours to trade are ofte n in Europe. If I had a 
period in which I was going to devote my life to trading, I would want to live in Europe. 
Let's go back and fill in some of your tradin g history. Where did you go after you decided to 
give up on being a floor trader? 
I got a call from Amos Hostetter, who had befrie nded me at Shearson. At the time, he was also 
trading some money for Commodities Corporation. Am os told me that I would be well advised to 
consider joining Commodities  Corporation as a trader. 
At the time, their theory was that they were go ing to hire all these gr eat econometricians to be 
traders. They had people like Paul Samuel-son on the board. They brought up the idea of hiring me 
at a meeting. The first question was, "What articles  has he written; in what  journals has he been 
published?" I had a B. A. in liberal arts and that  was it. The punch line was, "He just trades." 
Everybody thought that was very funny. 
But weren't they in busine ss to make money trading? 
They didn't think it was possible to really make money unless you had a Ph.D. But Amos 
convinced them to give me a chance. I believe I wa s the first non-Ph.D. trader  they had ever hired. 
They started me out with $30,000 in August 1974. Afte r about ten years, I had turned that account 
into $80 million. Those were some very good years. 
Did you multiply the original $30,000 into $80 million, or did they add money along the way?  
After the first few years, they gave me another $100,000 to trade. After that time, they were always 
taking money out. In those years, they were in an expansionary phase, and th ey taxed the traders 30 
percent a year to pay for their expenses. 
So you had to make 30 percent a year to keep  your account level. You must have had some 
incredible return years, given the growth of your account—particularly under that handicap. 
I was making at least 100 percen t a year for years and years.  
What was your best year? 
My best year must have been 1979. It was an incr edible year. I caught gold when it went up to over 
$800. 
You caught the whole move? 
I was in and out, but I remember catching big chunks  of it—$100 per ounce at a time. It was a wild 
time. In those days, I would buy gold in Aust ralia, Hong Kong would pus h it up $10 higher, it  23would go up another $10 in London, a nd by the time New York opened, I was able to sell out at a 
$30 profit. 
It sounds like there was an enormous advant age to buying gold in the overseas markets 
rather than in the United States. 
In those days, I had an advantage by being in California, because I was up trading in Hong Kong 
when my New York colleagues were asleep. I remember when I heard about the invasion of 
Afghanistan on the television news. I called H ong Kong to see if anybody knew about it, and 
nobody seemed to; the price wasn't changing. I was able to buy 200,000 ounces of gold before 
anybody knew what was happening. 
That's 2,000 contracts! Did you have any liquidity  problems with their taking on that size 
position in Hong Kong? 
No, they gave me the stuff, but of course, they got fried by doing it. I was told on my last visit to 
Hong Kong that I shouldn't visit the gold floor. Some of the peopl e still remember that episode. 
They knew who was on the other side of the trade? 
Yes, they knew. 
Did they think that you knew something? 
No, they probably thought I was just crazy, co ming in and buying all that gold. Then, when the 
news broke about five to ten minutes later, everybody started scrambling. I had an immediate $10 
per ounce profit on 200,000 ounces. 
It's hard to believe you could trade off the television news. 
I know. I had never done it before. That was the first, last, and only time, but I did do it. 
That particular gold market ende d in a near-vertical rise and fall. Did you get out in time? 
Yes, I got out around $750 on the way up. I felt sick, when I saw gold go up to nearly $900. But 
later when it was back down to  $400,1 felt much better about it. 
All in all, you got out very well. What tipped you off that we were near a top? 
At that time, we had many wild markets. One of my  rales was to get out when the volatility and the 
momentum became absolutely insane. One way I ha d of measuring that was with limit days. In 
those days, we used to have a lot of situations  when a market would go limit-up for a number of 
consecutive days. On the third straight limit-up day, I would begin to be very, very cautious. I 
would almost always get out on the fourth limit-up day. And, if I had somehow survived with any 
part of my position that long, I had a mandatory ra le to get out on the fifth limit-up day. I just 
forced myself out of the mark et on that kind of volatility. 
Your transition from being a losing trader to be ing very successful coincided with the big bull 
phase in the commodity markets during the early to mid-1970s. How much of your early 
success was due to your skills as a trader and how much was just the markets? 
Honestly, I think the markets were so good, that by buying and holding you just couldn't lose. 
There were a lot of other success st ories. Fortunes were being made. 
But a lot of those people didn't keep their fortunes. 
That's true. But, I was very fortunate. By the time the markets got difficult again, I was a good 
trader. By then, I had really learned my craft. Also, by that time, I had the advantage of having 
become very knowledgeable in one market: cocoa. For almost two years, I traded almost nothing 
but cocoa, because of the info rmation and help I got from He lmut Weymar [the founder of 
Commodities Corporation]. Helmut was an incredible  expert on cocoa. He wrote a book that was so 
deep I couldn't understand the cover. Also, he had all kinds of friends in the business. With the 
knowledge and information I got from Helmut and his friends, I felt that I knew the universe of 
cocoa in a way that I had never known any market before. 
That phase of almost exclusive cocoa trading obviously came to an end. What happened? 
Helmut retired from cocoa trading. 
I assume Helmut was not nearly as successful a trader as you were.  24Let's just say that I traded much bett er on Helmut's information than he did. 
Excluding the early losing years, were there any trades that stand out as being particularly 
traumatic? 
Well, I would never let myself get caught up in  potentially intimidating disasters. The worst 
situation occurred during my hea vy currency trading period. I was doing well and could afford to 
hold large positions. One time, I had a really large position in Deutsche marks when the Bun-
desbank came in and decided to punish the speculat ors. I called in just around the time that all this 
was happening and found out that I was out $2k milli on in about five minutes . So I got out, rather 
than see the $2k million loss go to $10 million. Then  I had to endure the di sturbing experience of 
watching the market recover its entire fall. 
How long after you got out? 
About half an hour.  
Did you go back in? 
No, they had taken the starch out of me by that point. 
In retrospect, do you feel you did the ri ght thing by getting out of that trade? 
Yes, but it still hurt to realize that if I had sat it out and done nothing, I would have been OK 
instead of losing $2 million. 
Did you invest any of the money you were making  in your trading, or did you keep plowing it 
back into your own account? 
I made a number of bad investments and lost a fair ly large chunk of the mone y I had made trading. 
When I was trading big, I wanted to have a reason to  keep doing it, so I just spent money wildly. At 
one time, I owned about ten houses and ended up losing money on all of them. Some I sold before I 
had even spent a single ni ght in them. I had a plane charter serv ice and lost a lot of money on that. 
At one point, I figured out that for every dolla r I made trading, 30 pe rcent was going to the 
government, 30 percent was going to support my pl anes, and 20 percent was going to support my 
real estate. So I finally d ecided to sell everything. 
It sounds like as wise as you were as a trader, you were naive as an investor. 
Yes, I was incredibly naive. Out of a fairly large number of real estate transactions—many in 
California—I lost money on all but one of them. I am probably the only pers on alive that can claim 
that dubious distinction. 
Why do you think you did so poorly on your investments? 
I would do everything emotionall y. I didn't analyze anything. 
In a sense, you were repeating the mistake of your early trading experi ence: getting involved 
in something you knew nothin g about and then losing mone y. Didn't any bells go off ? It 
almost sounds like you had a self-destructive instinct in  losing your money elsewhere. 
Yes, absolutely. I probably lost more than half the money I made. 
During this period when you were doing all these unwise things, didn't anybody try to grab 
you by the shoulders and say, "Do you realize what you're doing?" 
Yes, but any time someone on my staff did, I woul d fire them. At one time, I was employing sixty 
or seventy people, hi addition to all my money-lo sing businesses, I had a huge nut to make to just 
support the payroll. Frankly, a lot of the money I made just went down the drain. 
Did these losses have any of the emotional impact of losses in the market? The reason I ask is 
that you seem to talk about these in vestment losses very dispassionately. 
Yes, it hurt to realize what a fool  I had been, but I have learned not to be as attached to material 
things. I accepted it as a life lesson. I learned I don' t have to own a house in every beautiful place in 
the world; I can stay at a hotel and walk on the beach  or climb a trail there. Or, if I really feel like 
spoiling myself, I can charter a plane; I don't have to own one. 
Right, that certainly makes sense,  but what I am getting at is that I suspect that if you had 
lost the same amount of mo ney trading, it would have been a much more traumatic  25experience. Is that because your ego wasn 't attached to these other ventures? 
Yes, I'm sure that's true. I always felt that, at leas t, I was smart at one thing. I feel like trading is the 
only thing I am really good at. If not for that , I probably would have wound up shining shoes. 
Do you think being a great tr ader is an innate skill? 
I think to be in the upper echelon of successful traders requires an innate skill, a gift. It's just like 
being a great violinist. But to be a competen t trader and make money is a skill you can learn. 
Having been through the whole trading experi ence from failure to extreme success, what 
basic advice could you give a begi nning trader or a losing trader? 
The first thing I would say is al ways bet less than 5 percent of  your money on any one idea. That 
way you can be wrong more than twenty times; it will take you a long time to  lose your money. I 
would emphasize that the 5 percent applies to on e idea. If you take a long position in two different 
related grain markets, that is still one idea. 
The next thing I would advise is to always use stops. I mean actually put them in, because that 
commits you to get ou t at a certain point. 
Do you always pick a point where you will get out before you get in? 
Yes, I have always done that. You have to. 
I would imagine in your case you can't actually put a stop in because your orders are too 
large. 
Yes, but my broker can hold it. 
When you place an order to get into a position , is it accompanied by an order to get out? 
That's right. Another thing is that  if a position doesn't feel right  as soon as you put it on, don't be 
embarrassed to change your mind and get right out. 
So, if you put the trade on and five minutes later it doesn't feel right, don't think to yourself, 
"If I get out this quickly, my brok er will think that  I'm an idiot." 
Yes, exactly. If you become unsure about a positi on, and you don't know what to do, just get out. 
You can always come back in. When in doubt, ge t out and get a good night's sleep. I've done that 
lots of times and the next day everything was clear. 
Do you sometimes go back in right after you get out? 
Yes, often the next day. While you are in, you can't think. When you get out, then you can think 
clearly again. 
What other advice would you give the novice trader? 
Perhaps the most important rule is  to hold on to your winners and cu t your losers. Both are equally 
important. If you don't stay with your winners, you ar e not going to be able to pay for the losers. 
You also have to follow your own light. Because I ha ve so many friends who are talented traders, I 
often have to remind myself that if I try to trade their way, or on  their ideas, I am going to lose. 
Every trader has strengths and weaknesses. Some  are good holders of winners, but may hold their 
losers a little too long. Others may cut their winners a little short, bu t are quick to take their losses. 
As long as you stick to your own style, you get the good and bad in your own approach. When you 
try to incorporate someone else's style, you often wind up w ith the worst of both styles. I've done 
that a lot. 
Is it a problem because you don't have the same type of confidence in a trade that isn't yours? 
Exactly, hi the final analysis, you need to have the courage to hold the position and take the risk. If 
it comes down to "I'm in this trade because Brace is in it," then you are not going to have the 
courage to stick with it. So you might as  well not be in it in the first place. 
Do you still talk to other traders about markets? 
Not too much. Over the years, it has mostly cost me money. When I talk to other traders, I try to 
keep very conscious of the idea that  I have to listen to myself. I tr y to take their information without 
getting overly influenced by their opinion. 
I assume that we are talking about very ta lented traders, and it still doesn't make a  26difference. If it is not your own idea, it messes up your trading? 
Right. You need to be aware that the world is very sophisticated and always ask yourself: "How 
many people are left to act on this  particular idea?" You have to consider whether the market has 
already discounted your idea. 
How can you possibly evaluate that? 
By using the classic momentum-type indicators and observing market tone. How many days has the 
market been down or up in a row? What is the reading on the sentiment indexes? 
Can you think of any good examples of ma rket tone tipping you off on a trade? 
The most classic illustration I can think of is one of the soybean bull markets in the late 1970s. At 
the time, soybeans were in extreme shortage. On e of the things pushing the market up was the 
weekly government reports indicating strong export  commitments and sales. I was holding a heavy 
long position in soybeans and someone from Comm odities Corporation called me with the latest 
export figures. He said, "I have good news and I have bad news." I said, "OK, what is the good 
news?" "The good news is that the export commitmen t figure was fantastic. The bad news is that 
you don't have a limit position [the maximum permissible specula tive position size]." They were 
expecting the market to be limit-up for the next three days. 
Actually, I wound up being a little depressed that I didn't have a la rger position. The next morning, 
I entered an order to buy some more contract s on the opening, just in case I got lucky and the 
market traded before locking limit-up. I sat back  to watch the fun. The market opened limit-up as 
expected. Shortly after the opening,  I noticed a lot of ticks being recorded, as if the market was 
trading at the limit-up. Then prices eased off limit- up just as my broker called to report my fills. 
The market started trading down. I said to my self, "Soybeans were supposed to be limit-up for 
three days, and they can't even hold limit-up the first morning." I immediately called my broker and 
frantically told him to sell, sell, sell! 
Did you get out of your whole position? 
Not only that, but I was so excited that I lost coun t of how much I was sell ing. I accidentally wound 
up being short a substantial amount  of soybeans, which I bought b ack 40 to 50 cents lower. That 
was the only time I made a lot of money on an error. 
I remember a situation just like that. It was the cotton bull market when prices almost 
reached $1 a pound. To this day, I recall  I was long cotton and the week's export figure came 
out showing a half million bales of  exports to China. It was the most bullish cotton export figure I 
had ever seen. But instead of opening limit-up th e next day, the market opened only about 150 
points higher and then started trading o ff. That proved to be the exact high.  
Another interesting example, I remember, occurred wh en we were in a very inflationary period and 
all the commodity markets were trading in lock step fashion. On one particularly powerful day, 
almost all the markets went limit-up. On that day, cotton opened limit-up, fell back, and finished 
only marginally higher for the day. That was the ma rket peak. Everything else stayed locked limit-
up, but cotton never saw the light of day again. 
Is the implied rule that if you find a common be havior between markets,  you want to sell the 
one that is lagging as soon as it starts heading down? 
You absolutely want to put down a bet when a market acts terrib ly relative to everything else. 
When the news is wonderful and a market can't go up, then you want to be sure to be short. 
What kinds of misconceptions about th e markets get people into trouble? 
Well, I think the leading cause of financial disablem ent is the belief that you can rely on the experts 
to help you. It might, if you know the right expert. For example, if you happen to be Paul Tudor 
Jones' barber, and he is talking about the market , it might not be a bad id ea to listen. Typically, 
however, these so-called "experts" are not traders. Your average broker couldn't be a trader in a 
million years. More money is lost listening to brokers than any other way. Trading requires an 
intense personal involvement. You have to do your  own homework, and that  is what I advise 
people to do. 
Any other misconceptions?  27The foolish belief that there is c onspiracy in the markets. I have known many of the great traders in 
the world, and I can say that 99 percent of the ti me, the market is bigger than anybody and, sooner 
or later, it goes where it wants to go. Ther e are exceptions, but they  don't last too long. 
You have attributed a lot of your success to Ed and Amos who taught you the principles of 
trading. Have you, in turn, taught other traders? 
Yes. My best result, in terms of his becoming the best trader I ever  worked with, as well as being a 
close friend, is Bruce Kovner. 
How much of his success do you attribute to your training, and how much of it was just his own 
talent?  
When I first met Bruce, he was a writer and a pr ofessor; in his spare time, he was doing some 
trading. I was staggered by the breadth of tradi ng knowledge he had accumulated in such a short 
time. I remember the first day I met Bruce I tried to impress him with complicated concepts. Here I 
was, a professional trader who, in those days, sp ent fifteen hours a day trading and analyzing the 
markets, and I couldn't come up with anything that  he couldn't understand. I recognized his talent 
immediately. 
That relates to his intellect, but was there some thing about him that told you that he was 
going to be a good trader? 
Yes, his objectivity. A good trader can't be rigi d. If you can find somebody who is really open to 
seeing anything, then you have found the raw ingred ient of a good trader—and I saw that in Bruce 
right away. I knew from the moment I first met him that he was going to be a great trader. What I 
tried to do was convey to Brace the principles that  Ed and Amos had taught me, along with some of 
my acquired skills. My best trading occurred when  Brace and I were collaborating; we did some 
phenomenal trading. There were years when I was up 300 percent and he was up 1,000 percent. He 
had a very great gift. 
Do you feel you get ground down as a trader? 
Absolutely. Around 1983,1 began to taper off in my tr ading. I felt that I ne eded to recharge my 
batteries. 
How important is gut feel in trading? 
Gut feel is very important. I don't know of any great professional trader that doesn't have it. Being a 
successful trader also take s courage: the courage to try, the cour age to fail, the courage to succeed, 
and the courage to keep on going when the going gets tough. 
Do you have any goals aside from trading at this point? 
I have taken karate for many years.  I am already at a high level, but I would like to get the black 
belt. Also, I have made a study of spiritual traditi ons and there is a bit more work I would like to do 
with that. 
You sound very vague about it. Do you want to be vague? 
It is very hard to talk about this. Let me see how I can put it. Albert Einstein said that the single 
most important question is whether the universe is friendly. I think it is important for everybody to 
come to a point where they feel in side that the universe is friendly. 
Are you there now? 
I'm a lot closer. 
But that's not where you started off ? 
No. I started off with the feeling that it was an unfriendly place. 
Do you see yourself trading ten or twenty years from now? 
Yes, it's too much fun to give up. I don't want to make a lot more money. I would probably just end 
up losing it in real estate again. 
Is the fun aspect still there if you are doing it thirteen hours a day? 
No. If trading is your life, it is a torturous kind of excitement. But if you are keeping your life in 
balance, then it is fun. All the succ essful traders I've seen that last ed in the busines s sooner or later  28got to that point. They have a balanced life; they have fun outside of trading. You can't sustain it if 
you don't have some other focus. Eventually, you wind up overtrading or getting excessively 
disturbed about temporary failures. 
When you do hit a losing st reak, how do you handle it? 
In the past, I've sometimes tried to fight back by trading even heavier afte r I start losing, but that 
usually doesn't work. Then I start cutting down very fast to the point of stopping completely if it 
gets bad enough. But usually it never gets that bad. 
Do you sometimes manage to fight your way out of it? 
Sometimes, but most of the time I would have been better off if I had just stopped. I've had trouble 
bringing myself to do that, beca use I am a natural fighter. The t ypical pattern is: Lose, fight like 
hell, lose again, then cut back, or so metimes stop, until I get on a winning track. 
How long have you stopped for? 
Usually three, four weeks. 
When you are in a losing streak, is it because you are out of sync  with the markets, or is there 
a better way to describe it? 
I think that, in the end, losing begets losing. When you start losing, it touches off negative elements 
in your psychology; it leads to pessimism. 
There are very few traders who have been as su ccessful as you. What do you think makes you 
different? 
I am very open-minded. I am willing to take in in formation that is difficult to accept emotionally, 
but which I still recognize to be tr ue. For example, I have seen others make money much faster than 
I have only to wind up giving everything back, becau se when they started losing, they couldn't stop. 
When I have had a bad losing streak, I have been able to say to myself, "You just can't trade 
anymore." When a market moves counter to my exp ectations, I have always been able to say, "I 
had hoped to make a lot of money in this pos ition, but it isn't working, so I'm getting out." 
Do you keep track of your equity on a d ay-to-day basis? Do you actually plot it? 
I have done that a lot in the past. 
Is that helpful? Do you think it's a good idea for traders to plot their equity? 
I think so. If the trend in your equ ity is down, that is a sign to cut back and reevaluate. Or if you see 
that you are losing money a lot faster than  you made it, that would be a warning. 
Are there any advisors you pay attention to? 
My favorite market letter in terms of readabilit y, imagination, and knowledge of the subject is the 
California Technology Stock Letter (CTSL Publishing Partners, 155 Montgomery Street, Suite 
1401, San Francisco, CA 94104). I also like the market lett ers put out by Marty Zweig 
(TheZweigLetter, The Zweig Forecast, P.O. Box 360, Bellmore, NY 11710) and Richard Russell 
(Dow Theory Letters, Dow Theory Letters Inc., P. O. Box 1759, LaJolla, CA 92038). 
Of the traders I have interviewed, Zweig is probably the one most mentioned. 
You always get something of value out of Marty Zweig. He is very solid. 
Judging by the letters you have mentioned, I take  it that you trade stoc ks as well. How long 
have you been trading stocks? 
For about the last two years. 
Do you trade stocks differen tly than you trade futures? 
I'm more patient. 
Is the selection process different? 
No, I look for confirmation from the chart, the f undamentals, and the mark et action. I think you can 
trade anything in th e world that way. 
Do you focus on any particular types of stock? 
I don't trade the Dow stocks. I pref er the little ones, because th ey are not dominated by the big  29professional traders who are like sharks eating each ot her. The basic principle is that it is better to 
trade the Australian dollar than the Deutsche ma rk, and the small OTC stock than the big Dow 
stock. 
What are the fundamentals you look for in a stock? 
I like to use something I found in Investor's Daily: the earnings per share (EPS). [The EPS ranking 
is based on comparing the earnings per share growth of a stock relative to all other stocks. For more 
details on the EPS, see the William O'Neil and David Ryan interviews.] I combine the EPS with my 
own sense of market share potential. If a company has already saturated their little niche in the 
world, a high EPS is not that important. But, in t hose issues where the EPS is growing, and there is 
still plenty of pie out there, the situation is much more attractive. 
I also like to look at the price/earnings (P/E) ratio  in conjunction with the EPS. hi other words, 
while I like to see a company with a strong earnings growth pattern, I also wa nt to know how much 
the market is paying for that earnings growth pattern. 
So you like seeing a high EPS with a low P/E. 
Yes. That's the best combination. I am sure ther e is a way of combining the two on a computer and 
coming up with a very good system. 
How about the relative strength [a measure of a stock's price p erformance relative to all other 
stocks], which is anot her key indicator in Investor's Daily!  
I don't think that helps that much. Relative st rength tells you what a st ock has already done. 
Frequently, by the time you get a high relative strength figure, th e stock has exhausted itself. 
Is there anything else you look for in a stock? 
I look at the basic industry. For example, right now [May 1988], I ha ppen to be bullish on tanker 
rates and, therefore, the shipping business. 
For what reasons? 
Supply and demand. Tanker rates are like commodity pr ices; they follow a clas sic cyclical pattern. 
Prices get high and everyone makes a lot of money, so they build a lot of ships and prices go down. 
Eventually the ships are scrapped and prices go back up again. We have had very low rates for 
many years and have scrapped a lot of tankers annua lly. So we are entering th at part of the cycle 
where prices go back up again. 
Does trading become more difficult as the size of the account gets bigger? 
Yes, because you are forced to compete in fewer and fewer markets that are being traded by other 
big professionals. 
How much common behavior is there between di fferent markets? For example, can you trade 
bonds in the same way you trade corn? 
I really feel that if you can trad e one market, you can trade them a ll. The! principles are the same. 
Trading is emotion. It is mass ps ychology, greed, and fear . It is all the same in every situation. 
For most great traders, early failure is more the rule than the exception. De spite an incredible long-
term performance record, Michael Marcus bega n his trading career with an unbroken string of 
trading losses. Moreover, he wiped out not just once, but several times. The moral is: Early trading 
failure is a sign that you are do ing something wrong; it is not necessarily a good predictor of 
ultimate potential failure or success. 
I found it particularly interesting that, despite a number of painfu l trading losses, Marcus' most 
devastating experience was actuall y a profitable trade in which he  got out prematurely. Taking 
advantage of potential major winning trades is not only important to the mental health of the trader, 
but is also critical to winn ing. In the interview, Marcus stressed that letting winners ride is every bit 
as important as cutting losses short. In his own words, "If you don't stay with your winners, you are 
not going to be able to pay for the losers." 
Marcus learned about the dangers of overtrading the hard way. In one instance (the grain trade in 
the nonexistent corn blight year), an account he had built up from a very small stake to $30,000 was 
wiped out by betting all his mone y on a single trade. He made the same mistake a second time in 
the lumber market, coming to the brink of disa ster before narrowly escaping. These experiences  30had a dramatic impact on Marcus' trading philosophy. It is no accident that the first rule he cites 
when asked to give advice to the average trader  is: Never commit more than 5 percent of your 
money to a single trade idea. 
In addition to not overtrading, Ma rcus stresses the importance of committing to an exit point on 
every trade. He feels that protec tive stops are very important beca use they force this commitment 
on the trader. He also recommends liquidating pos itions to achieve mental clarity when one is 
losing money and is confused regarding market decisions. 
Marcus also emphasizes the necessity of followi ng your own mind as a trader. He suggests that 
following the advice of others, even when they are good traders, often leads to problems as it 
combines the worst elements of both traders. 
Finally, despite being an aggressi ve trader, Marcus strongly beli eves in being restrictive in 
selecting trades. He advises waiting for those trad es in which all the key elements line up in one 
direction. By doing so you greatly enhance the pr obability of success on each trade. Making lots of 
trades when the conditions appear to be only margin ally in favor of the trade idea has more to do 
with entertainment than trading success. 
 
 
 
 
 
  31Bruce Kovner-The World Trader 
Today, Bruce Kovner may well be the world's larges t trader in the interbank currency and futures 
markets. In 1987 alone, he scored profits in ex cess of $300 million for himself and the fortunate 
investors in his funds. During th e past ten years, Kovner has re alized a remarkable 87 percent 
averaged annual compounded return. Two thousand dollars invested with Kovner in early 1978 
would have been worth over $1,000,000 ten years later. 
Despite his incredible track record and huge trading size, Kovner has managed to keep a 
surprisingly low profile. He ha s assiduously pursued his privacy by stea dfastly refusing all 
interview requests. "You might be  wondering why I consented to th is interview," he said. As a 
matter of fact, I was, but I did not want to ra ise the question. I had assumed that his agreement 
reflected a vote of confidence and trust. Seven year s earlier, our paths had crossed briefly when we 
both worked at Commodities Corpora tion—he as one of the firm's princi pal traders, I as an analyst. 
Kovner continued, "It seems like I can't avoid some  publicity, and the stories are usually distorted 
and fanciful. I thought that this interview would help establish at leas t one accurate record." 
Kovner hardly fits the intuitive im age of a trader who typically holds positions with a total face 
value measured in billions of do llars. With his incisive intellect  and easygoing manner, he reminds 
one more of a professor than a giant-scale trad er in the highly leveraged currency and futures 
markets. Indeed, Kovner started out as an academic. 
After graduating from Harvard, Kovner taught pol itical science courses at Harvard and the 
University of Pennsylvania. Although he liked teaching, he was not enthused with the academic 
life. "I didn't enjoy the process of  always confronting a blank page in the morning and thinking of 
something brilliant to write." 
In the early 1970s, Kovner managed a number of po litical campaigns, with the idea of eventually 
running for office himself. He abandoned politics becau se he didn't have the financial resources, or 
the desire to work his way up the political ladder from committee jobs. During this time he also 
worked as a consultant for vari ous state and federal agencies. 
Still searching for a career dire ction, Kovner shifted his attention to the financial markets in the 
mid-1970s. He believed that his economics and political scienc e education provided the right 
background, and he found the idea of analyzing the world to make  trading judgments tremendously 
appealing. For about a year, Ko vner immersed himself in studyi ng markets and the related 
economic theory. He read everything he could get his hands on. 
One subject he studied intensively was inte rest rate theory. "I fell in love with uieyield curve." [The 
yield curve is the relationship between the yi eld on government securities and their time to 
maturity. For example, if each successively long er-term maturity provided a higher yield than a 
shorter-term maturity—for example,  five-year T-notes at a higher yield than one-year T-bills—the 
yield curve would reflect a cont inually rising slope on a graph.] 
Kovner's study of the interest rate ma rkets coincided with the initial ye ars of trading in interest rate 
futures. At that time, the interest rate futu res market was relatively unsophisticated and price 
distortions, which would be quick ly eradicated by arbitrageurs today, persisted over time. As 
Kovner explains it, "The market hadn't beco me important enough for CitiBank or Solomon 
Brothers, but it was impo rtant enough for me." 
One of the primary anomalies Kovner discovered was related to the price spread (difference) 
between different futures contracts. Futures are tr aded for specific months (for example, March, 
June, September, and December). Given the prevaili ng phase of the business cycle, interest rate 
theory predicted that the nearby contract (for exam ple, March) should trade at a higher price (lower 
yield) than the next contract (for example, J une). Although the nearest tw o contracts did indeed 
tend to reflect this relationship, Kovner found th at the price difference between more forward 
contracts often started trading at  near-zero levels. His first trad e involved buying a forward interest 
rate contract and selling a more fo rward contract, in the expectation that, as the purchased contract 
became the nearby contract with the passage of tim e, the price spread be tween the two contracts 
would widen. 
That first trade worked just according to text book theory and Kovner was hooked as a trader. His 
second trade also involved an intra-market spread [the purchase of one contra ct against the sale of  32another contract in the same market]. In this case, he bought the nearby c opper contract and sold a 
more forward contract, in the expectation that  supply tightness would cause the nearby copper 
contract to gain relative to the forward positi on. Although his idea eventually proved right, he was 
too early and lost money on that trade. At the e nd of these two trades, K ovner was still ahead, with 
his original $3,000 stake ha ving grown to about $4,000. 
My third trade is what really put me in the business. In early  1977, an apparent shortage was 
developing in the soybean market. It was a demand driven market. Every week the crush was 
higher than expected and nobody believed the figur es. [The crush is the amount of soybeans 
processed for use as soybean meal and soybean oil.] I was watching the July/November spread [the 
price difference between the old cr op July contract and the new cr op November contract]. Since it 
looked like we were going to run out of soybeans, I thought that the old crop July contract would 
expand its premium to the new crop November contra ct. This spread had been  trading in a narrow 
consolidation near 60-cen ts premium July. I figured I could eas ily stop myself out just below the 
consolidation at around a 45-cents premium. At the time, I didn't realize how volat ile the spread 
could be. I put on one spread [t hat is, bought July soybeans and simultaneously sold November 
soybeans] near 60 cents and it widened to 70 cents. Then I put on another spread. I kept on 
pyramiding. 
How big of a position did you build up? 
I eventually built up to a position of about fifteen contracts, but not before I had to switch brokerage 
firms. When I started out, I wa s trading at a small brokerage hous e. The head of the company, who 
was an old floor trader, went ove r the trades every day and spotte d what I was doing. By that time, 
I had built my position up to about ten or fifteen contracts. The margin  on a single outright contract 
was $2,000, while the spread margin was only $400. 
He told me, "The spread position you have on trades like an outright long position. I am going to 
raise your margins from $400 to $2,000 per contract."  [Spread margins are lower than outright 
margins, reflecting the assumption that a net l ong or short position will be considerably more 
volatile than a spread position. Reason: In a spr ead, the long contract portion of the position is 
likely to at leas t partially offset price movement  in the short contract position. In a shortage 
situation, however, an intercrop spread, su ch as long July soybeans/sh ort November soybeans can 
prove to be nearly as volatile as a net long or short position.] 
He was obviously quite concerned with the risk in your position. 
Yes. He was concerned that I had only put up $400 margin per spread, on a spread which behaved 
like a net long position. 
Actually, he wasn't that far off. 
He was right, but I was furious. So I moved my account to another brokerage firm, which shall 
remain nameless, for reasons that will soon become clear. 
You were furious because you felt he was being unfair, or— 
Well, I am not sure I thought he was being unfair,  but I certainly knew he was an obstacle to my 
objective. I moved my account to a major brokera ge house, and got a broker who was not very 
competent. The market kept moving up and I kept  adding to my positi on. I had put on my first 
spread on February 25; by April 12, my account was up to $35,000. 
Were you just adding to your position as the market went up, or did you have some plan? 
I had a plan. I would wait until th e market moved up to a certain level and then retraced by a 
specified amount before adding another unit. My pyramiding did not turn out to be the problem. 
The market had entered a string of limit-up moves.  On April 13, the market hit a new record high. 
The commotion was tremendous. My broker called me at home and said, "Soybeans are going to 
the moon. It looks like July is going limit-up, and N ovember is sure to follow. You are a fool to 
stay short the November contract s. Let me lift your November shorts for you, and when the market 
goes limit-up for the next few days, you will make  more money." I agreed, and we covered my 
November short position. 
ALL of it?!  33All of it [he laughs loudly]. 
Was this a spur of the moment decision? 
It was a moment of insanity. Fift een minutes later, my broker calls me back, and he sounds frantic. 
"I don't know how to tell you this, but the market is limit-downl I don't know if I can get you out." I 
went into shock. I yelled at him to get me out. The market moved off of limit-down by a little bit 
and I got out. 
Did you end up getting out at limit-down? 
I got out between limit-down and slightly above limit-down. I can tell you the dimensions of the 
loss. At the moment I covered my short November  position leaving myself net long July, I was up 
about $45,000. By the end of the day, I had $22,000 in  my account. I went into emotional shock. I 
could not believe how stupid I had been—how badly I had failed to understand the market, in spite 
of having studied the markets for years. I was sick to my stom ach, and I didn't eat for days. I 
thought that I had blown my career as a trader. 
But you still had $22,000 compared to your origin al stake of only $3,000. Keeping things in 
perspective, you were still in pretty good shape. 
Absolutely. I was in good shape, but— 
Was it the stupidity of the mist ake or was it the money that you  had given back that caused 
such emotional pain? 
No, it wasn't the money at all. I think it was the r ealization that there really  was "fire" there. Until 
then, I had ridden $3,000 to $45,000 without a moment of pain. 
On the way up, did you think, "This is easy"? 
It was easy. 
Did you give any thought to th e possibility that the market streak could eventually go the 
other way? 
No, but clearly, my decision to lift the short side of my spread pos ition in the middle of a panic 
showed a complete disregard for risk. I think what  bothered me so much wa s the realization that I 
had lost a process of rationality that I thought I had. At that moment, I realized that the markets 
were truly capable of taking money aw ay every bit as fast as they ga ve it to you. That made a very 
strong impression on me. Actually, I wa s very lucky to get out with $22,000. 
I assume that your quick action that d ay probably averted a complete disaster. 
Absolutely. After that day, the market went strai ght down as fast as it had gone up. Perhaps, if I 
hadn't made my stupid mistake, I might have made the mistake of riding the market down. 
What eventually happened to the spread? 
The spread collapsed. Eventually, it went belo w the level that I had first begun buying it at. 
Since you liquidated your position on the day the market and the spread topped, you would 
have given back a portion of the profits even if  it wasn't for the disastrous decision that 
forced you out of the market. 
That may be true, but for me, that was my "going bust" trade. It was the closest I ever came to 
going bust and, psychologically, it felt as if I had. 
Was that your most painful trade? 
Yes. Far and away. 
Even though you actually ended up making a substantial amount of money on the trade? 
I multiplied my money by nearly sixfold on that trad e. I was, of course, insanely leveraged, and I 
didn't understand how risky my position was. 
Was getting out of your entire position immedi ately after your broker ca lled to tell you the 
market was limit-down a matter of panic, or do you think you had some instinctive common 
sense about controlling risk? 
I'm not sure. At that moment, I was confronted with  the realization that I ha d blown a great deal of 
what I thought I knew about disc ipline. To this day, when something happens to disturb my  34emotional equilibrium and my sense of what the wo rld is like, I close out all positions related to 
that event. 
Do you have a recent example? 
October 19,1987—the week of the stock market cras h. I closed out all my positions on October 19 
and 20 because I felt there was something happeni ng in the world that I didn't understand. The first 
rule of trading—there are probabl y many first rales—is don't get ca ught in a situation in which you 
can lose a great deal of money for reasons you don't understand. 
Let's get back to the period after your soybean trade. When did you start trading again? 
About a month later. After a few months I had my account back to about $40,000. Around that 
time, I answered an ad for a trading assist ant position at Commodities Corporation. I was 
interviewed by Michael Marcus in his usual id iosyncratic manner. He had me return to 
Commodities Corporation several we eks later. "Well," he said, "I have some good news and some 
bad news. The bad news is that we are not hiring  you as a trading assistan t; the good news is that 
we are hiring you as a trader." 
How much money did Commodities Corporation give you to trade? 
Thirty-five thousand dollars. 
Were you trading your own money, as well, at the same time? 
Yes, and that is something I am very glad about. Commodities Corporation had a policy that 
allowed you to trade your pers onal account, as well as the comp any account, and Michael and I 
were very aggressive traders. 
Were you influenced by Michael? 
Oh, yes, very much. Michael taught me one th ing that was incredibly important [pause]. 
That is a great lead-in. What is the punch line? 
He taught me that you could make a million dollars. He showed me that if you applied yourself, 
great things could happen. It is very easy to  miss the point that you really  can do it. He showed me 
that if you take a position and use discipline, you can actually make it. 
It sounds like he gave you confidence. 
Right. He also taught me one other thing that is ab solutely critical: You have  to be willing to make 
mistakes regularly; there is not hing wrong with it. Michael taught me about making your best 
judgment, being wrong, making your next best judgment, being wrong, making your third best 
judgment, and then doubling your money. 
You are one of the most succe ssful traders in the world. There are only a small number of 
traders of your caliber. What make s you different from the average guy? 
I'm not sure one can really define why some trad ers make it, while others do not. For myself, I can 
think of two important elements. First, I have th e ability to imagine configurations of the world 
different from today and really believe it can ha ppen. I can imagine that soybean prices can double 
or that the dollar can fall to 100 yen. Second, I stay rational and disc iplined under pressure. 
Can trading skills be taught? 
Only to a limited extent. Over the years, I have trie d to train perhaps thirty people, and only four or 
five of those have turned out to be good traders. 
What happened to the other twenty-five? 
They are out of the business—and it had nothing to do with intelligence. 
When you compare the trainees th at made it to the majority that did not, do you find any 
distinguishing traits? 
They are strong, independent, and contrary in the extreme. They are able to take positions others 
are unwilling to take. They are di sciplined enough to take the right  size positions. A greedy trader 
always blows out. I know some real ly inspired traders who never ma naged to keep the money they 
made. One trader at Commodities Corporation—I don't want to mention his name—always struck 
me as a brilliant trader. The ideas he came up with  were wonderful; the markets he picked were  35often the right markets. Intellect ually, he knew markets much better  than I did, yet I was keeping 
money, and he was not. 
So where was he going wrong? 
Position size. He traded much too big. For every one contract I traded, he  traded ten. He would 
double his money on two different occasions  each year, but still end up flat. 
Do you always use fundamental analysis  in forming your trading decisions? 
I almost always trade on a market view; I don' t trade simply on technical information. I use 
technical analysis a great deal a nd it is terrific, but I can't hold  a position unless I understand why 
the market should move. 
Is that to say that virtually every position  you take has a fundamental reason behind it? 
I think that is a fair statement. But I would a dd that technical analysis  can often clarify the 
fundamental picture. I will give you an example. During the past six months, I had good arguments 
for the Canadian dollar going down, and good argumen ts for the Canadian dollar going up. It was 
unclear to me which interpretation was correct. If you had put a gun to my head and forced me to 
choose a market direction, I probably would have said "down." 
Then the U.S ./Canadian trade pact was announced, which changed the entire picture, hi fact, the 
market had broken out on the upside a few days ear lier, as the negotiations  were finishing up. At 
that inSant, I felt completely comfortable saying th at one of the major pieces ii the valuation of the 
Canadian dollar had just changed, and the marlet had already voted. 
Prior to the agreement, I felt the Canadian dollar wa s at the top of a hill, a nd I wasn't sure whether 
it was going to roll backwads or forwards. When th e market moved, I was prepared to go with tlat 
movement because we had a conjunction of tw o important element!: a major change in 
fundamentals (although, I wasn't smart enough tc know  in which direction it would impact the 
market), and a techncal price breakout on the upside. 
What do you mean you weren't smart enough to know in which direction the trade pact 
announcement would move the market? Since U. S./Canadian trade is so much a larger 
component of Canadian trade than it is of U.S. trade, wouldn't it hive been logical to assume 
that the trade pact would be bullish for the Canadian dollar? 
It didn't have to happen that way. I could just as easily have aigued that th e trade pact was negative 
for the Canadian dollar because tie elimination of  the trade barriers would allow imports from the 
Ш. to submerge Canadian interests.  There are still some analysts w ho tdhere to that argument. My 
point is that there are well-inf ormed tralers who know much more than I do. I simply put things 
together. Tfey knew which way to go, and they voted in the marketplace by buying Canadian 
dollars. 
Is the generalization of that example that when an importart fundamental development 
occurs, the initial direction of the marlet m ove is often a good tip-off of the longer-term 
trend? 
Exactly. The market usually leads because th ere are people Wio know more than you do. For 
example, the Soviet Union is a very gocd trader. 
Good trader in which markets? 
In currencies, and grains to some degree. 
How does one know what the Soviets are doing? 
Because the Soviets act through commercial banks and dealers, and you hear about it. 
It seems rather contradictory to me that a country  that is so poor in running its own economy 
should be a good trader. 
Yes, but if you ask people in the busine ss, you will find out that they are.  
Why, or how? 
It is a joke, but perhaps they do read some of our mail. The Soviets (and other governments) 
occasionally have advance information. Why shouldn't they? They have the best developed 
intelligence service in the world. It is a well k nown fact in the intelligence community that the  36Soviets (and others) are capable of eavesdroppi ng on commercial communication. That is why the 
large commodity trading firms sometimes use scra mblers when they are making very sensitive 
calls. 
My point is that there are thous ands of difficult-to-understand mechanisms that lead the market, 
which come into play before the news reaches so me poor trader sitting at his desk. But the one 
thing that does hit the market is a huge sale or purchase. 
Isn't that the basic rationaliz ation for technical analysis? 
Technical analysis, I think, has a great deal that is right and a great deal  that is mumbo jumbo. 
That's an interesting statement. Wh at's right and what's black magic? 
There is a great deal of hype att ached to technical analysis by so me technicians who claim that it 
predicts the future. Technical analysis tracks the pa st; it does not predict the future. You have to use 
your own intelligence to draw conclusions about what the past activity of some traders may say 
about the future activit y of other traders. 
For me, technical analysis is lik e a thermometer. Fundamentalists who say they are not going to pay 
any attention to the charts are like a doctor who says  he's not going to take a patient's temperature. 
But, of course, that would be sheer folly. If you  are a responsible participant in the market, you 
always want to know where the market is—whether it is hot and excitable,  or cold and stagnant. 
You want to know everything you can about  the market to give you an edge. 
Technical analysis reflects the vote of the enti re marketplace and, theref ore, does pick up unusual 
behavior. By definition, anything th at creates a new chart pattern is something unusual. It is very 
important for me to study the details of price ac tion to see if I can observe something about how 
everybody is voting. Studying the charts is absolutely crucial and alerts me to existing disequilibria 
and potential changes. 
Do you sometimes put on a trade because you look  at a chart and say, "I 've seen this pattern 
before, and it is often a forerunner of a market advance." That is, even though you may not 
have any fundamental reasons? 
Yes, I will do that sometimes. I would only add that, as a trader who has seen a great deal and been 
in a lot of markets, there is not hing disconcerting to me about a pr ice move out of a trading range 
that nobody understands. 
Does that imply you usually go with breakouts? 
Sure. 
But the markets are often prone to false breako uts. There has to be more to it than that. 
Tight congestions in which a breakout occurs for reasons that nobody unders tands are usually good 
risk/reward trades. 
How about breakouts that occur b ecause there is a story in the Wall Street Journal that day? 
That would be much less relevant. The Heisenberg  principle in physics provides an analogy for the 
markets. If something is closely observed, the odds  are it is going to be al tered in the process. If 
corn is in a tight consolidati on and then breaks out the day the Wall Street Journal carries a story 
about a potential shortage of corn, the odds of the price move being sustained are much smaller. If 
everybody believes there is no reason for corn to br eak out, and it suddenly does, the chances that 
there is an important underlying cause are much greater. 
It sounds like you are saying that the less expl anation there is for a price move occurring, the 
better it looks. 
Well, I do think that. The more a price pattern is  observed by speculators, the more prone you are to 
have false signals. The more a ma rket is the product of nonspecu lative activity, the greater the 
significance of technical breakouts. 
Has the greatly increased use of computerized trend-following systems increased the 
frequency of false technical signals? 
I think so. The fact that there are billions of dol lars out there trading on technical systems that use 
moving averages or other simple pattern reco gnition approaches helps produce many more false  37signals. I have developed similar systems myself, so that I can tell when the other systems are 
going to kick in. If it is clear that prices are moving because th ese billions are kicking into the 
market, it is a lot less interest ing than if a breakout occurs because the Russians are buying. 
Let's say you do buy a market on an upside b reakout from a consolidation phase, and the 
price starts to move against you—that is, back into the range. How do you know when to get 
out? How do you tell the difference betw een a small pullback and a bad trade? 
Whenever I enter a position, I have a predetermine d stop. That is the only way I can sleep. I know 
where I'm getting out before I get in. The position size on a trade is determined by the stop, and the 
stop is determined on a technical basis. For example, if the market is in the midst of a trading range, 
it makes no sense to put your stop w ithin that range, since you are lik ely to be taken out. I always 
place my stop beyond some technical barrier. 
Don't you run into the problem that a lot of ot her people may be using the same stop point, 
and the market may be drawn to that stop level? 
I never think about that, because the point about a technical barrier—and I've studied the technical 
aspects of the market for a long time—is that the market shouldn't go there if you are right. I try to 
avoid a point that floor traders can get at eas ily. Sometimes I may place my stop at an obvious 
point, if I believe that it is too far away or too difficult to reach easily. 
To take an actual example, on a recent Friday af ternoon, the bonds witne ssed a high-velocity 
breakdown out of an extended trading range. As fa r as I could tell, this price move came as a 
complete surprise. I felt very comfortable selling the bonds on the premise that if I was right about 
the trade, the market should not make it back through a certain amount of a previous overhead 
consolidation. That was my stop. I slept easily in that position, because I knew that I would be out 
of the trade if that happened. 
Talking about stops, I assume beca use of the size that you trade,  your stops are always mental 
stops, or is that not necessarily true? 
Let's put it this way: I've organize d my life so that the stops get ta ken care of. They are never on the 
floor, but they are not mental. 
What eventually tells you that you are wrong on  a major position trade? Your stop point will 
limit your initial loss, but if you  still believe in the fundamental analysis underlying the trade, 
I assume that you will try it again. If you are wrong about the general direction of the market, 
won't you take a series of losse s? At what point do you throw in the towel on the trade idea? 
First of all, a loss of money itself slows me down, so I reduce my positions. Secondly, in the 
situation you described, the change in the t echnical picture will give me second thoughts. For 
example, if I am bearish on the dollar and a majo r intermediate high has been penetrated, I would 
have to reevaluate my view. 
Earlier you mentioned that you had developed your own trend-following systems to provide 
an indicator of where the large amount of  money managed under such systems could be 
expected to hit the market. Do you use your ow n trend-following systems to trade any portion 
of the money you manage? 
Yes, about 5 percent. 
Is that the level of your confiden ce? I guess it is not negative 5 percent, so it could be worse. 
Overall, my systems make money, but they have vol atility characteristics, and problems related to 
risk control that I don't like. But,  since they offer dive rsification from my ot her trading, I use them 
to a small degree. 
Do you feel it is possible to ever develop a system that would do as well as a good trader? 
I think it is unlikely because the learning features of such a system would have to be very highly 
developed. Computers are good at "lea rning" only when there are clear hierarchies of information 
and precedent. For example, expert systems for medical diagnostics are very good because the rules 
are very clear. The problem with developing expert  systems for trading is that the "rules" of the 
trading and investment game keep  changing. I have spent some tim e working with expert system 
developers, and we concluded that  trading was a poor candidate for this approach, because trading  38decisions encompass too many types of knowledge, and the rules for interp reting the information 
keep changing. 
Does the fact that you are trad ing so much greater size than you did in your early years make 
it more difficult? 
There are far fewer markets with sufficient liquidity for the optimum size of my trades. 
How much money are you currently managing? 
Over $650 million. 
I assume more than half of that is due to capital appreciation. 
Yes, last year's profits alone were about $300 million. 
What are some markets that you really have tro uble trading because of insufficient liquidity? 
An example of a market I like a great deal, but in  which the liquidity is often poor, is copper, hi 
copper, I am now the elephant. 
What kind of size can be moved comfortably in a market like copp er before it becomes a 
problem? 
I would say, in a day, you can comfortably move 500 to 800 contracts; uncomfortably, somewhat 
more than that. But the daily volume of copper is  currently only 7,000 to 10,000 contracts and a lot 
of that is local trading or sp reads. In contrast, in the T-bond market, you can move 5,000 contracts 
without a problem. You can also move very la rge size, in the interbank currency market. 
Can you trade a market like coffee, which do esn't have deep liquidity, but sometimes can 
develop enormous trends? 
Yes, I did trade coffee last year and made a few million dollars in it. Now, if I am managing $600 
million, and I kick in $2 million in profits on coff ee trades, it doesn't really matter that much. In 
fact, it could even be counterproductive, since the time and energy I spend concentrating on coffee 
diminishes my focus on the currency ma rkets, which I trade far more heavily. 
It would appear that you have reached a size  level that impedes your trading performance. 
Since you have substantial personal funds, did you ever consider just trading your own 
money and avoiding all the related  headaches in managing money? 
Yes, but there are several reasons why I don't. A lthough I invest a great deal of my own money in 
my funds, the portion of my funds that is managed money represents a call. [Analogy to an option 
that has unlimited profit potential in  the event of a price rise, but risk  limited to its cost in the event 
of a decline.] I don't say this to be flippant, si nce my reputation among my investors is extremely 
important to me, but a call is  a much better position than a symmetrical win/lose position. 
Is there a practical limit to the amount of money you can manage? 
In most commodity futures markets, there certainly is. However, in currencies, interest rates, and a 
few commodities such as crude oil, there are limits, but they are very  high. I plan to very carefully 
manage the future growth in the size of funds I am managing. 
When you put in orders in markets that are not among the most liquid—in other words, not 
T-bonds or the major currencies—do you find your orders actually moving the market? 
They can, but I never bully a market. 
Talking about that, one often hears stories about very large traders trying to push the 
markets up or down. Does that work? 
I don't think so. It can be done for the short term, but eventually it will lead to serious mistakes. It 
usually results in arrogance and a loss of touc h with the underlying ma rket structure, both 
fundamentally and technically. The traders that I know who thought too highl y of their ability and 
tried to bully the market, ultimately made the mistake of overtrading and went under. 
Without mentioning any names, can you provide an example? 
There is a recent example of a British trading orga nization getting into serious trouble after they 
tried to corner the crude oil market. At first they succeeded, but then they lost control and crude oil 
prices fell by $4.  39What was the end result? 
They lost about $40 million and the organization is in trouble. 
You are probably managing more money than an y other futures trader in the world. How do 
you handle the emotional strain when you hit a losing period? 
The emotional burden of trading is substantial; on  any given day, I could lose millions of dollars. If 
you personalize these losse s, you can't trade. 
Do the losses bother you at all anymore? 
The only thing that disturbs me is poor money ma nagement. Every so often, I take a loss that is 
significantly too large. But I neve r had a lot of difficulty with th e process of losi ng money, as long 
as losses were the outcome of sound  trading techniques. Lifting the short side of the July/November 
soybean spread was an example that scared me. I learned a lot about risk control from that 
experience. But as a day-in, day-out pr ocess, taking losses does not bother me. 
Did you have any losing years? 
Yes, in 19811 lost about 16 percent. 
Was that due to errors you made, or the nature of the markets? 
It was a combination of the two. My main problem was that it was the first major bear market in 
commodities I had experienced, and bear markets have  different characteristics than bull markets. 
Was it a matter of becoming complacent ab out markets always being in an uptrend? 
No, the problem was that the principal character istic of a bear market is very sharp down 
movements followed by quick retracements. I would always sell too late and then get stopped out 
in what subsequently proved to be part of a wi de-swinging congestion pattern. In a bear market, 
you have to use sharp countertre nd rallies to enter positions. 
What other mistakes di d you make that year? 
My money management was poor. I had too many correlated trades. 
Was your confidence shaken at all that year ? Did you go back to the drawing board? 
I went back and designed a lot of risk manageme nt systems. I paid strict attention to the 
correlations of all my positions. From that point on, I measured my total risk in the market every 
day. 
When you trade currencies, do you use the interbank market or the futures market? 
I only use the interbank market, unless I am doi ng an arbitrage trade against the /MM. [The 
International Monetary Market (IMM) is a subsid iary of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange and the 
world's foremost currency futures exchange.] The liquidity is enormously better, the transaction 
costs are much lower, and it is a twenty-four-hour  market, which is important to us because we 
literally trade twen ty-four hours a day. 
What portion of your trading is in currencies? 
On average, about 50 to 60 percent of our profits come from currency trading. 
I assume you are also trading currencies beyond th e five that are currently actively traded on 
the IMM. 
We trade any currency that is highly liquid. Virtua lly all the European currencies (including those 
of the Scandinavian countries), all the major Asian currencies and the Mideast currencies. Crosses 
are probably the most important trading vehicle that we use that you can't trade on the IMM. 
[Crosses are a trade involving two foreign co untries. For example, buying British pounds and 
selling an equal dollar amount of Deutsche marks is a cross.] Y ou can't trade crosses on the IMM 
because they have fixed contract sizes. 
But you could do a cross on the IMM by adju sting the ratio of the number of contracts 
between the two currencies to equalize the dollar value of each position. 
But it is much more exact and direct to use the interbank market. Fo r example, Deutsche 
mark/British pound and Deutsche mark/Japanese yen crosses are highly traded and very active. 
I assume that when you do a mark/yen cross, you price it in dollars, not in terms of one of the  40two currencies. 
That's right. You simply say: Buy $100 [million] worth of marks and sell $100 [million] worth of 
yen. In the interbank market, the dollar is  the unit of exchange all over the world. 
In situations where a surprise news development or the release of an economic statistic out of 
line with expectations causes a sharp price resp onse in currencies, does the interbank market 
react less violently than the futures market, or do the arbitrageurs keep the two markets 
tightly linked? 
The two markets are well arbitraged, but those are the moments when a very swift arbitrageur will 
make some money. The markets do get a li ttle bit out of line, but not a lot. 
Will the interbank market price response to such events be less extreme? 
Yes, because what happens on the futures market is that the locals back aw ay and let the stops run. 
The only thing that pulls the markets back is the arbitrageurs who have the bank on the other side. 
What percentage of bank market trading repres ents commercial activity, or hedging, vis-a-
vis speculative trades? 
The Fed has done a study on that. I don't have th e figures on hand, but it is  basically a hedging 
market. The banks are the principal speculato rs, as well as a few players like myself. 
Is there a reason why the futures market hasn't been able to capture a larger percentage of 
world currency trading? 
The currency futures market is not efficient in seve ral of the most important respects. First, hedging 
usually has a specific dollar and date requirement. For example, if I need to hedge $3.6 million for 
April 12, the bank just takes it. The futures mark et, however, trades only for specific dates and 
fixed contract sizes, so the he dger is not precisely covered. 
So actually there is no way the futures market  can compete, because the interbank market 
can tailor a hedge for any customer. 
That's right. In addition, the activity takes pla ce within normal commercial banking relations. That 
is, very often, the hedger wants to show his banking in terest that he has a locked-in profit so he can 
borrow against it. 
Can you talk about your fundamental analysis methodology? How do you  determine what the 
right price for a market should be? 
I assume that the price for a market on any given da y is the correct price, th en I try to figure out 
what changes are occurring th at will alter that price. 
One of the jobs of a good trader is to imagine a lternative scenarios. I try to form many different 
mental pictures of what the wo rld should be like and wait for one of them to be confirmed. You 
keep trying them on one at a time. Inevitably, most of these pictures will turn out to be wrong—that 
is, only a few elements of the picture may prove correct. But then, all of a sudden, you will find that 
in one picture, nine out of ten elements click. That scenario th en becomes your image of the world 
reality. 
Let me give you an example. Th e Friday after the October 19 st ock market crash, I had trouble 
sleeping, which is very unusual for me. But I am su re I wasn't the only trad er to lie awake that 
night. All week long, I struggled with how the events  of that week were goi ng to impact the dollar. 
I was trying on different visions of the world. On e of these pictures was total panic—the world 
coming to an end, financially. 
In this scenario, the dollar becomes the safest po litical haven, and as a re sult, there could be a 
tremendous rise in the dollar. In fact, on Tuesday of  that week, the dollar did rise dramatically as 
many people withdrew their money from other pl aces. During the next three days, there was 
tremendous confusion. By the end of the wee k, the dollar had starte d to give ground again. 
It was then that it all coales ced in my mind. It became absolute ly clear to me that given the 
combination of a need for stimul ative action, dictated by the trem endous worldwide financial panic, 
the reluctance of the Bank of Japan and German  Bundesbank to adopt pot entially inflationary 
measures, and the continuing wide U.S. trade defic its, the only solution was for Treasury Secretary 
Baker to let the dollar go. Someone had to play the stimulative role , and that someone would be the  41United States. 
As a result, the dollar would drop a nd it would not be in the interest  of the other central banks to 
defend it. I was absolutely convinced that  was the only thing that Baker could do. 
You realized all this late Friday. Was it t oo late to take acti on in the markets? 
Yes, and it was a very tense weekend because I r ealized that the dollar might open sharply lower. I 
waited for the Far East markets to open Sunday night. 
Do you do a lot of your trading outside of U.S. hours? 
Yes. First, I have monitors everywhere I go—in my home, in my country home. Second, I have a 
staff on duty twenty-four hours a day. 
Is your staff instructed to alert you imme diately in case something big happens? 
Absolutely. First of all, we have call levels in every currency. If a currency breaks out of a range 
that we have previously identified, my  staff is under instructions to call. 
How often do you get calls in  the middle of the night? 
I have an assistant trader, and the joke is that he is allowed to wake me up at home twice a year. 
But it really isn't necessary ve ry often. Whenever the markets ar e busy, I know what is going on all 
the time. My home is fully equipped with trading m onitors and direct lines. Also, my assistant's job 
is to be up and get the calls . He probably gets called th ree or four times a night. 
Are you saying that you delegate the nighttime decision making? 
We create a scenario for every cu rrency at least once a week. We de fine the ranges we expect for 
each currency and what we will do if it breaks out of these ranges. 
So your assistant knows that if  currency X gets to 135 He sh ould buy it or sell it?  
Those decisions have been made beforehand. But they  are under instruction to  call me if the Prime 
Minister resigns, or if there is a major unexpected  currency revaluation, or something else happens 
to invalidate the recent scenario. 
Are there times you end up trading at night? 
Yes, a lot. 
You obviously can't trade round the clock. How do you structure your time to balance your 
work versus your personal life? 
I generally try to keep my trading confined between  8 A.M. and 6 or 7 P.M. The Far East is very 
important, and if the currency markets are very ac tive, I will trade the Far East, which opens at 8 
P.M. The A.M. session in Tokyo trades until 12 P.M.  If the markets are in a period of tremendous 
movement, I will go to bed for a couple of hours a nd get up to catch the next  market opening. It is 
tremendously interesting and exciting. 
To see the wave roll from country to country? 
Absolutely. When you are really involved, the sc reen almost reaches ou t and grabs you. The way 
the quotes are made changes: They get wider; they get wilder. I have  contacts all over  the world in 
each of these markets and I know what is going on. It is a tremendously exciting game. There are 
opportunities all the time. Forgetting trading for a minute, one of the r easons I am in this business is 
that I find the analysis of worl dwide political and economic even ts extraordinarily fascinating. 
The way you describe it, you make the whole pr ocess sound like a constant game, rather than 
work. Do you really look at it that way? 
It doesn't feel like work, except when you lose—the n it feels like work [he laughs]. For me, market 
analysis is like a tremendous multidimensional chess board. The pleasure of it is purely intellectual. 
For example, it is trying to figure out the problems  the finance minister of  New Zealand faces and 
how he may try to solve them. A lo t of people will think that sounds ridiculously exotic. But to me, 
it isn't exotic at all. Here is a guy running this tiny country and he ha s a real set of problems. He has 
to figure how to cope with Australia, the U.S., and the labor unions that are driving him crazy. My 
job is to do the puzzle with him and figure out  what he is going to decide, and what the 
consequences of his actions will be that he or the market doesn't antic ipate. That to me, in itself, is 
tremendous fun.  42In following all these varied world markets,  I know you read a tremendous amount of 
economic literature. Do you also pay any attent ion to the various market advisory letters? 
I get a "guru report" every day.  
Who is on that list? 
All the newsletter writers who ha ve a large following. People like Prech-ter, Zweig, Davis, Eliades, 
and so on. 
Do you use your guru report as a measure of contrary opinion? 
I try not to be too much of a wise guy because dur ing major price moves, they will be right for a 
portion of it. What I am r eally looking for is a consensus that th e market is not confirming. I like to 
know that there are a lot of people who are going to be wrong. 
So if you see that most of the members on your guru list are bullish at a time when the market 
is not moving up, and you have some fundamental  reason to be bearish, you will feel stronger 
about the trade? 
Yes, much stronger. 
Do you think people can trade profit ably by just following the gurus? 
Probably, but my impression is that to make m oney, you have to hold a pos ition with conviction. 
That is very difficult when you are following someone else. There are some good gurus, however. 
For example, in the stock market, I like Marty Zw eig. He uses excellent risk control. Unlike some 
other gurus, he doesn't believe he is predicting the future; he is si mply observing what is happening 
and making rational bets. 
You talk about both the importance of risk cont rol and the necessity of having the conviction 
to hold a position. How much risk do you typically take on a trade? 
First of all, I try very hard not to risk more than 1 percent of my portfolio on any single trade. 
Second, I study the correlation of my trades to reduce my exposure. We do a daily computer 
analysis to see how correlated our positions are. Through bitter experience, I have learned that a 
mistake in position correlation is the root of some  of the most serious problems in trading. If you 
have eight highly correlate d positions, then you are really trading one position that is eight times as 
large. 
Does that mean if you are bullish in both the De utsche mark and Swiss fr anc, then you decide 
which one you like better and place your en tire long position in that currency? 
Yes, that is definitely true. But even more impo rtant is the idea of trading a long in one market 
against a short in a related market. For example, right now, although I am net short the dollar, I am 
long the yen and short the Deutsche  mark. In all my trading, if I am long something, I like to be 
short something else. 
Do the cross rates like the Deutsche mark/Jap anese yen move slower than the individual 
currencies themselves? 
Not necessarily. For example, rece ntly the sterling/mark cross ra te was in a yearlong congestion 
between approximately 2.96 and 3.00. It finally br oke out about a month ago. The day it broke out, 
it challenged the top of the range  about twenty times. The Bank of  England kept on defending it. 
Finally the Bank of England gave in . As soon as the cross rate pier ced the 3.01 level, there were no 
trades. In fact, there were no trades until it hit 3.0350. So it moved virtually a full 1 percent without 
trading. 
Is that unusual for the interbank market? 
Very unusual. It meant everybody was watching the 3.00 level. Once everyone realized the Bank of 
England was not stepping in, no one wanted to be a seller. 
Is that type of breakout—a violent and quick  one—much more reliable than a typical 
breakout? 
Yes, it is much more reliable.  
Even though your fills are worse? 
Terrible fills. The worse the fills ar e, the better your trade. In that  case, after trading for a couple of  43hours between 3.04 and 3.02, the rate went straight up to 3.11. 
Do you believe that the cross rates provide bett er trading opportunities in currencies than net 
short or long positions against the dollar? 
Yes, because there are a lot fewer people paying atte ntion to the cross rates. The general rule is: 
The less observed, the better the trade. 
Your trading style involves a synthesis of fundame ntal and technical analysis. But if I were to 
say to you, Bruce, we are going to put you in a room and you can have either all the 
fundamental information you want, or all the ch arts and technical input you want, but only 
one, which would you choose? 
That is like asking a doctor whet her he would prefer treating a patie nt with diagnostics or with a 
chart monitoring his condition. You need both. Bu t, if anything, the fundamentals are more 
important now. In the 1970s, it was a lot easier to make money using techni cal analysis alone. 
There were far fewer false brea kouts. Nowadays, everybody is a chartist, and there are a huge 
number of technical trading system s. I think that change has made it much harder for the technical 
trader. 
Do you think that the trend-following system approach will eventually  self-destruct under the 
weight of its own size and the fact that most  of these systems are using similar approaches? 
I think that is true. The only thing that will save those technical systems is a period of high 
inflation, when simple trend-following methodol ogies will work again. Ho wever, there is no 
question in my mind that if we  have stable, moderate rates of  inflation, the technical trading 
systems will kill each other off. 
Let's shift our conversation to the stock market. Do you believe that th e stock market behaves 
differently from other ma rkets, and if so, how? 
The stock market has far more short-term counter trends. After the market has gone up, it always 
wants to come down. The commodity markets аre driven by supply and demand for physical goods; 
if there is a true shortage, prices  will tend to keep trending higher. 
So if the stock index market is much choppier, are there any technical approaches that can 
work? 
Perhaps, but they keep changing. I have found that  very long-term decision-making systems will 
catch the bigger stock market advances , but you need to use very wide stops. 
So you have to be very long term to filter out the noise. 
Much longer than most traders can handle b ecause that strategy involves riding out large 
retracements. As an alternative approach, one of  the traders I know does very well in the stock 
index markets by trying to figure out how the stock market can hurt the most traders. It seems to 
work for him. 
How can he quantify that? 
He looks at market sentiment numbers, but basically it is a matter of gut feel. 
Some critics have attributed the October 19 87 crash to program trading. What are your own 
feelings? 
I think two different elements we re involved. First, overly high prices le ft the stock market 
vulnerable to a decline, which wa s triggered by rising interest rate s and other fundamental causes. 
Second, that decline was accentuated by heavy sell ing from pension funds who were involved in 
so-called portfolio insurance. 
Are we talking about portfolio insurance as opposed to arbitrage-type program trading! 
[Portfolio insurance involves systematically sellin g stock index futures as stock prices decline 
(and covering those shorts when prices rise) in order to reduce portfolio risk. Program trading 
normally refers to buying and selling stock index futures against an opposite position in a basket of 
stocks when the prices of the two are out of line.]  
Right. The only way in which arbitrage could be sa id to have contributed to the problem, rather 
than helped it, is that if it weren’t for program trading arbitrage, portfolio  insurance may never have  44been developed. 
So the arbitrageurs are only to be blamed fo r the market decline insofar as they made 
portfolio insurance possible? 
Yes. If you read the Brady report, you will see that the portfolio insurers cam e into the market with 
billions of dollars wort h of sales in a few hours. The market was unable to abso rb it. Portfolio 
insurance was a terrible idea; it was insurance in  name only. In fact, it was nothing more than a 
massive stop-loss order. If it were not for portfolio  insurance selli ng, the market would still have 
gone down sharply, but nothing like the 500-point decline we witnessed. 
Do you feel great traders have a special talent? 
In a sense. By definition, there can only be a re latively small group of superior traders, since 
trading is a zero-sum game. 
What is the balance of trading suc cess between talent and hard work? 
If you don't work very hard, it is extremely unlikely that you will be a good trader. 
Are there some traders who can just coast by on innate skills? 
You can do that for a while. There are a lot of one-year w onders in trading. It is quite common to 
find somebody who has a strong feeli ng that sugar is going to 40 cen ts, or that the copper spreads 
are going to widen dramatically, a nd that one idea turns out right. For example, recently I heard 
about a trader who made $27 million trading copper sp reads this past year, and then lost virtually 
all of it. 
What advice would you give the novice trader? 
First, I would say that risk management is the most important thing to be well understood. 
Undertrade, undertrade, undertrade is my second piece of advice. Whatever you think your position 
ought to be, cut it at least in half. My experience w ith novice traders is that they trade three to five 
times too big. They are taking 5 to  10 percent risks on a trade when  they should be taking 1 to 2 
percent risks. 
Besides overtrading, what other mistak es do novice traders typically make? 
They personalize the market. A common mistake is to think of the market as a personal nemesis. 
The market, of course, is totally impersonal; it doesn't care whether you make money or not. 
Whenever a trader says, "I wish," or "I hope," he is engaging in a destructive way of thinking 
because it takes attention away from the diagnostic process. 
In my conversation with Kovner, I was struck  by the immense complexity and scope of his 
analysis. I still can't fi gure out how he can find the time to follow and analyz e intricately the 
economies of so many different count ries, let alone integrate these va rious analyses into a single 
picture. Clearly, Kovner's unique synthesis of worldwide fundament al and technical analysis is 
hardly translatable to the averag e trader. Nevertheless, there are key elements in Kovner's trading 
approach that have direct releva nce to the more mundane trader. 
Kovner lists risk management as the key to successf ul trading; he always decides on an exit point 
before he puts on a trade. He also stresses the need for evaluating risk on a portfolio basis rather 
than viewing the risk of each trade independentl y. This is absolutely critical when one holds 
positions that are highly correlated, since the overall portfolio risk is likely to be much greater than 
the trader realizes. 
One statement by Kovner, which made a partic ularly strong impression on me, concerned his 
approach in placing stops: "I place my stop at a point that is too fa r away or too difficult to reach 
easily." In this manner, Kovner maximizes the chan ces that he will not be stopped out of a trade 
that proves correct, while at th e same time maintaining rigid m oney management discipline. The 
philosophy behind this approach is that it is bett er to allocate the predetermined maximum dollar 
risk in a trade to a smaller numbe r of contracts, while using a wide r stop. This is the exact reverse 
of the typical trader, who will try to limit the lo ss per contract, but trade as many contracts as 
possible—an approach which usually results in  many good trades being stopped out before the 
market moves in the anticipated direction. The moral is: Place your stops at al point that, if reached, 
will reasonably indicate that the trade is wro ng,' not at a point determined primarily by the  45maximum dollar amount you are willing to lose per c ontract. If the meaningful stop point implies 
an uncomfortably large loss per contract , trade a smaller number of contracts. 
Kovner's worst trading mistake—his "going bust trade, " as he terms it—resulted from a spur of the 
moment decision. My own personal experience underscores that there is probably no class of trades 
with a higher failure rate than impulsive (not to be confused with intuitive) trades. Regardless of 
the approach used, once a strategy  is selected, the trader should st ick to his or her game plan and 
avoid impulsive trading decisions (for example,  putting on an unplanned trade because a friend has 
just recommended it; liquidating a position before th e predetermined stop point is reached because 
of an adverse price movement). 
Finally, Kovner views a good trader as "strong, independent, and co ntrary in the extreme," and 
points to discipline and a willingness to make (a nd accept) mistakes as significant traits of the 
winning trader. 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  46Richard Dennis-A Legend Retires 
Richard Dennis became intrigued by commodity trading during the late 1960s, while earning the 
minimum wage as a runner on the exchange floor.  In the summer of 1970, he decided to take a 
crack at trading on his own, and with $1,600 borrowed from his family, he purchased a seat on the 
Mid America Exchange. 
The Mid Am, as it is called, is a kind of minor league exchange because it trades pint-sized 
versions of the contracts traded on the major exch anges. The Mid Am tends to attract the business 
of small hedgers and speculators for whom a single regu lar-sized contract represents too large a 
position. As a fledgling trader with little risk ca pital, the Mid Am was well suited to Dennis—it 
was also the only exchange on which he could afford a seat. 
The seat cost Dennis $1,200, leaving him a scant $400 for trading. Incredible as it may seem, he 
eventually transformed that tiny stake into a fortune, which has been estimated by some to 
approach $200 million. As his father is reported to  have said, in what must be one of the grand 
understatements of all time, "Let's just say Ri chie ran that four hundred bucks up pretty good." 
Although Dennis has been exceptionally successful  over the long haul, he has withstood a few 
dramatic setbacks. He was in the midst of one su ch downturn at the time of  our interview. Several 
of the public funds managed by Dennis lost e nough during the late 1987- early 1988 period to 
trigger the 50 percent loss cuto ff point for the cessation of tr ading. Dennis' personal account 
witnessed a similar fate. As he expressed in a le tter to investors, "These results parallel immense 
losses in my own personal trading." 
Perhaps one of Dennis' most impressi ve traits as a trader is his ability to weather such hard times 
with little emotional impact. Apparently, he has l earned to accept such sporad ic large losses as part 
of the game. His confidence during such periods  remains unshaken, as he believes he will 
eventually rebound if he stays tr ue to his basic trading stra tegy. Had I not known, judging by the 
mood and confidence of the man I in terviewed, I would sooner have gu essed that he had just made 
a small fortune rather than lost one. 
Whatever the stereotype image of a centimillionaire may be, Dennis does not fit it. His low-
spending lifestyle is legendary. In fact, his only real extravagances are his sizable political and 
charitable contributions. His political views also do not mesh with the popular image of the very 
rich. Dennis is the founder of the Roosevelt Cent er for American Policy Studies, a liberal think 
tank, and he supports the concept of higher tax rates for wealthy Americans. In recent years, he has 
taken an increasingly active role in the political sphere, supporting a variet y of liberal candidates. 
Unlike trading, his win-loss ratio in politics has b een disappointing. In the 1988 presidential race, 
Dennis was the national cochairman for the Babbitt campaign. 
In drawing up a list of candidates to be interviewed for this project, Dennis was an essential name. 
He is one of the foremost trading legends of our time—a trader that a number of others interviewed 
in this book cited with the phras e, "I'm not in his league." 
In setting up the interview, I dealt with one of Dennis' assistants. After e xplaining the project to 
him, he told me he would talk to  Dennis and get back to me. About one  week later, I received a call 
informing me that Dennis could see me on a date  about one month forwar d for exactly one hour. I 
explained that I was coming to Chicago for the primary purpose of interv iewing Dennis and that 
one hour was hardly enough time to cover all the essentia l areas. The response e ssentially was: that 
was all the time allotted; the implicit message: Take  it or leave it. I agr eed, hoping that I would get 
some more time if the interview was going well. 
I arrived about five minutes before the appointed  time and was ushered into a large but decidedly 
unpretentious office. Dennis arrive d precisely on the hour, shook ha nds politely, and sat down at 
his desk. He apologized in advance if, in the course  of the interview, he occasionally glanced at the 
quote screen, explaining that he c ould keep his mind on the intervie w at the same time, and would 
signal me if he had to put in any orders. Having the experience of trading myself (albeit on an in-
fmitesimally smaller scale), I explained that I understood. 
As the interview began, there was an element of uneas e on both our parts. In my case, I had a sense 
of a ticking clock with not enough time to accomplish the task at ha nd. In the case of Dennis, I 
believe it was a matter of a genuinely shy personalit y, at least in terms of a first meeting. After five  47to ten minutes, the tension was gone, the atmosphere became relaxed, and the conversation flowed 
smoothly. 
Forty-five minutes into the interview, I began to  think that things were going so well that Dennis 
would continue our conversation beyond the allotted hou r. At exactly ten minutes before the end of 
the hour, my illusion was shattered. "I've only got a bout ten more minutes," he said, "so if there's 
still stuff that's important you may want to get to  it." I shuffled through my index cards and quickly 
tried to identify some of the key questions I had not yet covered. Precisely at the end of the hour, 
Dennis said, "That's about all the time I have, thank you." 
One segment of questions I did not get to dealt with  the political side of Dennis' experiences. These 
topics included the Senate hear ings on alleged manipulation of th e soybean market by Dennis, the 
Roosevelt Institute, and the various political figures Dennis had known. Although these subjects 
were certainly areas of interest and color, they we re not pertinent to the primary focus of this book. 
Consequently, I chose questions rela ted to trading before attempting to turn to anything politically 
oriented. 
At the end of the interview, I played my final ca rd by saying, "I didn't ev en get to any questions 
related to the political side." "They're not interest ed in that anyway," Denni s replied as he politely 
said goodbye and left the office. 
About six weeks later, I requested and obtained a follow-up interview with Dennis. The portion of 
the interview dealing w ith the budget deficit problem and Denni s' large losses in his public fund 
trading at that time came  from this second meeting. 
A month after our last conversation, Dennis a nnounced that he was re tiring from trading to 
concentrate on his political intere sts full-time. Will Dennis never trade again? Maybe, but don't bet 
on it. 
How did you first get invol ved in commodity trading? 
After graduating high school, I got a summer job as a runner on the floor and I dabbled in trading a 
little bit. With my minimum-wage salary, I was making $40 a week, and losing $40 an hour 
trading. I didn't know what I was do ing. The advantage was that at least I got to do it with small 
amounts of money. I like to say the tuition was small for what I learned. 
I heard the story that before you turned twen ty-one, you had your father stand in the ring, 
while you stood on the sidelines signaling trades to him. 
That was in 1968 and 1969. My father had the memb ership but he didn't know much about trading. 
He was just going along with it beca use I was underage and wanted to  do it. When I turned twenty-
one, it was one of the happiest days in his life because  he said, "I really ha te this. I have no idea 
what I'm doing. It's yours!" 
Were you at a disadvantage trading one step  removed, with your father filling the orders? 
Sure. We consistently lost. 
But you couldn't have lost very much because you were trading very small. 
I probably lost a couple of thous and dollars durin g that period. 
Do you consider that period worthwhile, nonetheless, because of the lessons learned? 
Yes, in retrospect, I wo uld say this to new traders—although  it may not be a reassuring thought—
when you start, you ought to be as bad a trader as you are ever going to be. 
Because it is less expensive at that time? 
Right. You shouldn't be too surprised if you really screw up. 
Do you know traders for whom early success proved to be their undoing? 
I have noticed variations of that. There are a lo t of people who get imprin ted like ducks. You can 
teach them that a warship is their mother if you get them young enough. For a lot of traders, it 
doesn't matter so much whether their first big trade is successful or not, but  whether their first big 
profit is on the long or short side. Those people tend to  be perennial bulls or bears, and that is very 
bad. Both sides have to be equa lly OK. There can't be anything psychologically more satisfying 
about one than the other. If there is , your trading is going to go askew. 
I think that's what happened to a lot of people in  the 1973 runaway bull market in soybeans. Even if  48they didn't make money themselves, but were just  present to witness the market mania and see a 
few people make a lot of money, they were imprinted with it. 
You're talking about a subsequent bias to th e bullish side because of that experience? 
Yes. 
What gave you confidence when you first starte d trading on the Mid America Exchange with 
such a small stake? After all, one mistake and you were out of the game. 
Well,  no,  the advantage of the Mid America Excha nge was that they traded minicontracts. I had a 
few mistakes in me, and I made most, but not all of them. I don't know that  I had any confidence. I 
just had what a lot of people have when they get in  this business: a need to try to succeed. I mean, if 
you were betting on this sort of thing before th e fact, you should have bet that it wouldn't work. 
There is no doubt about that. 
Most traders are not successful in the fi rst year. What were you doing differently? 
I was doing enough things ri ght that I didn't capsize even with that small cap italization. I was lucky 
enough to stagger into having the right positi ons on before the big corn blight in 1970. 
Was that luck or foresight? 
I think it was more foresight. I had very pale ideas,  rales, and attitudes about the market then. But a 
few that I learned were ri ght, like go with the trend. 
One Friday, the grain markets all closed at their highs for the year. I believed—and I still believe—
that you go with the trend, and the stronger the tre nd, the better. I remember getting in on the close 
and just buying a couple of mi nicontracts in corn, wheat, and beans. The next Monday morning 
they all opened up the limit because of the corn blight news. 
Sure that didn't have to happen, and if it didn't, it would have set me back. It might have taken a lot 
longer to get to about $2,000, which compared to $400 was a real grubstake. But, it wasn't like I 
threw a dart and decided what to do. I did something that should wo rk in the long ran—I went with 
the trend. 
Is this particular pattern— a very strong close on a Friday—a market  characteristic that you find 
useful as an indicator of th e following week's price action?  
Yes, at a minimum, it is important not to have a short position with a loss on Friday if the market 
closes at a high, or a long position if it closes at alow. 
I was curious about your going to graduate sc hool despite your initial trading success. 
I signed up for graduate school before the summer of 1970, which was when I traded in the pit for 
the first time. I had just pla nned to trade over the summer, but  the three months and $3,000 in 
profits made a big impression on me. I went to Tu lane in New Orleans a nd lasted for about one 
week. I used my laundromat quarters phoning trades  into Chicago. Once I used up all the quarters 
and had nothing but dirty clothes, I had no choice but to come back to Chicago. 
Since then you have been a full-time commodity trader? 
Yes. 
What comes to mind as your most dramatic  or most emotional trading experience? 
There was one in the first year . I had just quit graduate school to trade. One day, I made a 
particularly bad trade and lost  about $300. Since I only had about $3,000, that was a very big loss 
and it was destabilizing.  I then compounded the error by revers ing my original position and losing 
again. To top things off, I then reversed back to  my original position and lo st a third time. By the 
end of the day, I had lost $1,000, or one -third of my entire capitalization. 
Since then, I have learned that wh en you have a destabilizi ng loss, get out, go home, take a nap, do 
something, but put a little time be tween that and your next decisi on. When you are getting beat to 
death, get your head out of the mi xer. Looking back, I realized that if I had had a trading rale about 
losses, I wouldn't have had that traumatic experience. 
In retrospect, would you say that was one of your best trades because you were so imprinted 
with that experience that you didn't make a mistake of that magnitude, percentagewise, 
again?  49Absolutely. I learned to avoid tryi ng to catch up or double up to rec oup losses. I also learned that a 
certain amount of loss will affect your judgment, so you have to put some time between that loss 
and the next trade. 
I guess a corollary of that would be: When things  aren't going right, don't push, don't press. 
Yes. After all is said and done, you have to minimize your losse s and try to pres erve capital for 
those few instances when you can make a lot in a ve ry short period of time. What you can't afford 
to do is throw away your capital on  suboptimal trades. If you do, you w ill be too debil itated to trade 
when the right position comes along. Even if you put the trade on, it will be relatively small 
because your capital will have been depleted by the other trades. 
Was the 1973 soybean market your first really big market? 
I made enough money in that market to go to the Chicago Board of Trade the next year. I didn't 
make my money by just going long soybeans. I was ba sically a pit trader, who traded in and out a 
lot. The markets were very good, because there was ex cellent order flow. It wa s a great time to be 
in the pit. 
So it wasn't so much catching the trend. It was more a matter of scalping the market 
successfully. 
Also, so many people would make incredibly bad trad es just to take a profit. They would get out 
even though the market was locked limit-up and almost sure to go up the next day. They couldn't 
stand the profits burning a hole in their pocket. I would try to get in when they were getting out. 
It sounds like easy pickings. 
There was some amount of risk, but  if you were disposed to going w ith a strong trend, it was a deal. 
They were giving you an edge to do it. 
Giving you a high probability that th e next day you would be ahead? 
You have to remember some of these markets we nt up the limit ten days in a row. Most people 
thought that even four or five cons ecutive limit-up days was impossible. 
In situations where a market goes limit-up, limit-up, limit-up, at  some point, the market may 
open limit-down. How do you recognize or sense when not to buy at limit bid? 
It's just an odds play. There is  a lot of volatility in  the outcome, but you know the odds are in your 
favor when you go long at limit bid. 
In all the years you have traded, have th ere been any really bad years? Was there a 
particular market or two that you were dead wrong about and that caused it to be a bad 
year? 
When we have had bad trading periods, it is really not one market that does it. In those situations, 
almost all the markets are going si deways and making lots of false breakouts. If one of the markets 
is decent, that is usually enough to avoid a bad situation. 
Is there any year that stands out? 
1978 was not a good year for trading. I compounded losses unnecessarily b ecause I was in the 
process of making the transition from floor trader to off-the-floor trader and had no idea how 
different they were. 
Was 1978 the year that you started trading from an office? 
In 1977,1 was mostly a floor trader, and by 1978 I had made the full-time transition. 
Did that switch cause you to become more of a long-term position trader? 
Ultimately, what I learned from 1978 is that you have to be longer term as a desk trader. In the pit, 
if it looked like soybeans were going to break 3 cents, I would sell, and if it didn't break, I would 
get out. You don't have that luxury off the floor, because you lose the edge when putting in the 
orders. Also, the judgments you make  looking at prices on the screen aren't as good as those made 
in the pit watching what is goi ng on. In the pit, there are indi cators that you learn subconsciously, 
like "these three guys are never right at market turns," and if they al l do the same thing at the same 
time, a light clicks on. It took me a long time to realize th at those tools were n't going to be 
available anymore.  50Why did you make the change? You were doing really well on the floor. Why switch to a 
desk? 
When I started in 1970, there were  no futures markets in currencies,  interest rates, or gold. By 
1978, these markets had been listed on the board long enough to be viable. The currencies started in 
1974, but it took several years to get enough volume. 
So, it was the desire to trade more markets than you physically could in a single location that 
motivated your move? 
And the opportunity didn't exist five years earlier. 
I understand that you initiated a trader -trainee program. What year was that? 
We hired a group at the be ginning of 1984 and another group at the beginning of 1985. 
What was the motivation for this program? 
I have a partner who has been a friend since hi gh school. We have had ph ilosophical disagreements 
about everything you could imagine.  One of these arguments was wh ether the skills of a successful 
trader could be reduced to a set of rules—th at was my point of view—or whether there was 
something ineffable, mystical, subjective, or intuitive that made someone a good trader. This 
argument had been going on for a long time, and I guess  I was getting a little frustrated with idle 
speculation. Finall y, I said, "Here is a way we can definitely  resolve this argument. Let's hire and 
train some people and see what happens." He agreed. 
It was an intellectual experiment. We trained them as well as we could. That was the way to do the 
experiment right, I thought. I tried to codify al l the things I knew about the markets. We taught 
them a little bit about probability, money management , and trading. It turned out I was right. I don't 
say that to pat myself on the back, but even I am surprised how well it worked. It's frightening how 
well it worked. 
Is your basic contention that you can take almo st any reasonably inte lligent individual and 
turn him into a successful trader? 
No. We screened for people we thought would be right. We received 1,000 applications and 
narrowed it down to forty people whom we interviewed. Then we picked ten. 
What qualities were you looking for? 
I don't like to discuss that because if I told you one of the things we looked for was chess players, 
and we ever do it again, we would be i nundated by resumes from chess players. 
Was intelligence one of the key items? 
It was one of the traits, but it wa sn't the essential item. To find the things that we were looking for, 
we could choose from intelligent or extremely inte lligent people. We picked the ones with extreme 
intelligence just because they were available. 
Didn't you have any reluctance about giving away trade secrets? 
Sure, but I don't think trading st rategies are as vulnerable to not working if people know about 
them, as most traders believe. If what you are doi ng is right, it will work even if people have a 
general idea about it. I always say that you could publish trading rules in the newspaper and no one 
would follow them. The key is consistency and di scipline. Almost anybody can make up a list of 
rules that are 80 percent as good as what we taught our people. What  they couldn't do is give them 
the confidence to stick to those rale s even when things are going bad. 
How long was the training process? 
Shockingly short. In the first year , it took two weeks. Then we had them trade for a month and keep 
a log indicating why they made their trades. We want ed to see if they were consistent in doing what 
they had been taught. We really got good at it in  the second year—the cour se took just one week. 
How many trainees were there? 
Twenty-three in total.  
What were the results? 
We dropped three people who didn' t do well. The other tw enty, however, have averaged about 100 
percent profit per year.  51When you train people, you tell them your basic approach to the markets. Isn't there a risk of 
creating twenty clones of Richard Dennis? Wouldn' t their trading results be highly correlated 
with what you are doing? 
There was a huge spread. One of the things that we  repeatedly told the class was: "We are going to 
teach you what we think works, but you are expect ed to add your own pers onal flair, feeling, or 
judgment." 
How large are the stakes these traders are using? 
It has increased over the years as they have ma de money. I would say on average about $2 million 
each. 
What did they start out with? 
One hundred thousand dollars each. 
I've heard this group of trad ers referred to as the "turtles ." I found that term somewhat 
amusing. What is the origin of the name? 
When I decided to do the trader-tra inee program, I had just returned fr om a trip to the Far East. In 
telling someone about the program I said, "We are goi ng to grow traders just like they grow turtles 
in Singapore." I had visited a farm there and seen a huge vat with thousands of squirming turtles; 
that became my image of growing traders. 
How much of a role does luck play in trading? 
In the long run, zero. Absolutely zero. I don't think anybody winds up making money in this 
business because they started out lucky. 
But on individual trades, obvi ously, it makes a difference? 
That is where the confusion lies. On any individual trade it is almost all luck. It is just a matter of 
statistics. If you take something that has a 53 pe rcent chance of working each time, over the long 
run there is a 100 percent chance of it working. If I review the results of two different traders, 
looking at anything less than one year  doesn't make any sense. It might be a couple of years before 
you can determine if one is better than the other. 
You are one of the few people who is both a discretionary trader and a systems trader. How 
would you compare the two approaches? 
Professional traders may do some ve ry intelligent things, but they  have a tendency not to think 
systematically about what they ar e doing. For example, most trader s who do a trade that works will 
not think: Why did it work? What did I do here that I might be ab le to do in another market, at 
another time? There is not a lot of  reflection on the process of tradi ng, hi contrast, I think I always 
have been analytical about trading, even befo re I ever researched a mechanical system. 
On the opposite extreme, you have the academic types who research before they have ever traded. 
They lack the seat-of-the-pants knowledge necessar y to develop good trading systems. Mercifully, I 
did the trading first. Therefore, the research we do is more applicable to the real world. 
Can you give me an example of how the la ck of real world experience would hurt the 
researcher? 
As an example, assume I develop a mechanical sy stem that often signals placement of stops at 
points where I know there will tend to be a lot of stops , hi the real world, it is not too wise to have 
your stop where everyone else ha s their stop. Also, that system is going to have above-average 
skids. If you don't understand that a nd adjust the results ac cordingly, you are go ing to get a system 
that looks great on paper, but  is going to do consistently  poorer in the real world. 
You mentioned that before you developed a m echanical trading system, you paid close 
attention to the trading process. Did you keep a log of what you did righ t and wrong, or was it 
a matter of memory? 
Yes, I would write down observations and thin k about them. I thought about everything I was 
doing. 
Is that something you would advise other traders to do to improve— that is, keep track of 
what they are doing right and what they are doing wrong?  52Sure. The trading experience is so intense that there is a natural tendency to want to avoid thinking 
about it once the day is ove r. I am that way when things are wo rking. But, when they are not, it 
spurs me to want to think about what I'm doing  and how I might do better.  When things go bad, 
traders shouldn't stick th eir heads in the sand and just hope it gets better. 
What you are saying is that the times when it is most tempting to a void thinking about the 
markets at all are the times when you sh ould be thinking about them the most. 
Right. I don't have any problem with that be cause I am obsessive about the markets. 
What do you do in a situation where your feelin gs as a trader tell you to do one thing and 
your systems point in the other direction? 
If they are absolutely opposed, you do not hing until you can resolve that conflict. 
Are most of your systems trend oriented in nature? 
Yes. 
So, by definition, they will nev er be in the right direction at market turns. Yet you, as an 
experienced trader, may sense when a market m ay be prone for a turn. In a situation like 
that, would you be willing to buy because of what you see as a trader even though your 
system is short? 
I would probably want to be flat, since I tend to  weigh the psychological, opinion-oriented segment 
of trading about equal with the t echnical and trend-following element. 
So you want to see the market display some  signs of turning around before you'll commit? 
What is more likely is that I will be positioned in the right di rection of a trend and decide to 
liquidate faster than a trend-following syst em would because of the intuitive factor. 
What about entering a new trade counter to a prevailing trend? 
I've certainly done it—that is, made countertrend in itiations. However, as a rule of thumb, I don't 
think you should do it. 
Do those type of trades do more poorly than other trades? 
Generally, yes, although every now and then they may give you a great stor y like going short sugar 
at 60 cents, which I did. [Sugar plummeted from a high of 66 cents in N ovember 1974 to a relative 
low under 12 cents only seven months later. E ach 1 -cent move in sugar is worth $ 1,120 per 
contract. A large trader like Denni s will often trade positions measur ed in thousands of contracts.] 
I've got ten stories like that. But I have to tell you, in all honesty, I don't think the broad class of 
trades I have done like that  have been profitable. 
The short sugar trade is a great example beca use the market had witnessed an incredibly 
explosive upmove and it took a lo t of courage to step in as a se ller at 60 cents. But take the flip 
side when sugar is in a real bear market and is  down to 5 cents; every trend-following system 
in the world is going to be short. Yet, if conditions are such that the fundamentals are in 
transition and the market price is only a little over the cost of the bag it's packed in, would 
you make an exception? 
Actually, I've lost more money in situations like that because all the market has to do is go down 
one more cent and you are out of there. I made a lot of money going short sugar at 60 cents, but I 
lost much more going long sugar at 6 cents. 
When you do a trade like that , that is, buying a market because the downside is so-called 
"limited," do you just ride it out, or  do you eventually throw in the towel? 
You throw it in. Because how do you know? Maybe it is going to 2 cents; maybe it is going to 1 
cent. 
I guess a main concern is that you are cons tantly giving up the premium in the forward 
months. [In a bear market, the more forward contracts tend to trade at a premium. For 
example, May sugar might be  at 6 cents, July at 6\ and October at 7. Even if cash prices 
remained stable, a holder of October futures would lose 1 cent between May and October.] 
Sure, you are forced out at 3 and get back  in at 5. Then it falls to 3 again.  53Otherwise, there wouldn't be th at much risk in the trade. 
Right. The idea that one side  of the market is much more likely to work in the absence of anything 
else is an illusion. The market ju st wouldn't be there if  that was true. There were plenty of guys 
who went short soybeans at $4 in 1973, because just  like sugar at 4 cents couldn't go any lower, 
beans at $4 couldn't go any higher. Well, not only did they go highe r, they went to  a high of $12.97 
in a matter of four or five months. There is anot her point that I think is  as important: You should 
expect the unexpected in this bus iness; expect the extreme. Don't think in terms of boundaries that 
limit what the market might do. If mere is any lesson I have learned in the n early twenty years that 
I've been in this business, it is that the unexp ected and the impossible happen every now and then. 
So don't be too tied to history? 
Right. 
And yet, all your rules are based on history. Is there a contradiction there? 
No, because a good trend-following system will keep you in the market until there is evidence that 
the trend has changed. If you had been doing your  historical research on soybeans in 1972, you 
would have concluded that any time soybeans a dvance by 50 cents, you mi ght as well get out, 
because the market had never moved up or down by significantly more than that. Obviously, that 
was the wrong conclusion because it went up an other $8. A good trend-following system, however, 
would have kept you in for most of the move. 
So you don't want to draw boundaries  from history over market behavior? 
Right. The correct approach is to say: This structure means up, and this structure means up no 
more, but never that this structur e means up this much and no more. 
When you trade a system, do you go with the versio n of the system that tested out best for the 
past, or do other factors command consideration? 
One of the toughest problems in deciding how to tr ade is whether you just go with what is optimal 
for the data base, or whether you start from some other premise.  You might deliberately trade 
something other than the optimal parameter set [version of the system w ith the best past per-
formance] because you think the future is going to be unlike the past in a specific way. By 
definition, any other parameter set is going to have a poorer past pe rformance than the optimal set. 
But if the difference in performance is only 10 percent, it might well be worth that 10 percent 
difference if you believe the suboptimal set, as measured by past data, will fit the future better. 
You have gone from being a very small trader to  a very large trader, especially now that you 
are managing outside money. Do you find that or der size gets in the way? Does it become 
substantially more difficult to be successful when you are trading size? 
At some level it would. I don't think we have reached that point yet, although we may not be 
tremendously far away from it. I think about thre e times the amount we are handling now would be 
just about it. We currently have about $120 million in customer funds. 
In other words, you haven't hit the wall yet? 
No. 
Is that because you are using many different a pproaches and, therefore, don't have all your 
orders going in at one point? 
Yes. You have to think about diversification. If you had one method, or one person, making all the 
decisions, you couldn't handle amount s that large. But if you use di fferent strategies and have a 
diversity in decision makers, you can handle se veral hundred million dollars without any major 
problem. 
Could that have been a subliminal reason fo r developing your training program—to try to 
diversify the decision-making process? 
Actually, we hadn't thought of it that  way, but it did work to our adva ntage. In fact, we are going to 
try to market some of the traders we have trained for trading customer money. 
Is slippage a problem in your trading? [Slippage is the difference between the theoretical 
execution price assumed by a computer program and the actual fill price.]  54No. We try to make a hard-nosed estimate when bu ilding the cost of trading into a system. Also, we 
reduce our costs significantly  by having our own brokers. 
When you hold a major position, at what poin t do you know you are wrong? What tells you 
to get out of the position? 
If you have a loss on a trade after a week or two, you are clearly wrong. Even when you are around 
breakeven, but a significant amount of time has passed, you are probably wrong mere too. 
Do you define your maximum risk point when you get into a trade? 
You should always have a worst case point. The only choice should be to get out quicker. 
Are you largely a self-taught trader, or did other traders teach you lessons that were 
worthwhile? 
I would say I am self-taught. What is really amazi ng is how little published literature there is on 
trading. 
Is there anything you can recommend to people who are interested in trading? 
I think Edwin Lefevre's Reminiscences of a Stock Operator [reputedly a semifictionalized 
biography of Jesse Livermore, the legendary stock trader] is interesting and captures the feel of 
trading pretty well, but that book was written sixty-five years ago. 
Are there some key trading strategies that you can talk about without revealing any secrets? 
The market being in a trend is the main thing that eventually gets us in a trade. That is a pretty 
simple idea. Being consistent and making sure you do that all the time is probably more important 
than the particular characterist ics you use to define the trend. Whatever method you use to enter 
trades, the most critical th ing is that if there is a major trend,  your approach should  assure that you 
get in that trend. 
A trend could easily be defined using a simple  system. Is there something special that you 
look for to define a trend? 
No. If I see a trend developing, I kn ow eventually I'll have to get in. The question is whether I get 
in earlier or later, and that might  depend on how I see the market r eacting to news. If a market goes 
up when it should go up, I might buy earlier. If it goes down when it should go up, I'll wait until the 
trend is better defined. 
How much common behavior is there between mark ets? Are the patterns of beans similar to 
the patterns of bonds, or do markets have their own personalities? 
I could trade without knowing the name of the market. 
So, what you are saying is that pattern s in different markets are very similar. 
Yes. In our research, if a system doesn't work  for both bonds and beans, we don't care about it. 
Would you say the stock ma rket is an exception? That is, do es the stock market also behave 
like other markets, or do es the stock market have its own behavior pattern? 
I think it is probably separate.  
Why would you say that is true? 
Well, my research on individual stocks shows that price fluctuations are clos er to random than they 
are in commodities. Demonstrably, commodities are trending and, arguably, stocks are random. 
Do you have an explanation for that phenomenon? 
I believe that there is not enough fundamental info rmation per stock to create sufficient trends to 
move them from their random character. There ar en't as many commodities as there are stocks. 
In other words, there is not the same flow of  information as in the commodity markets? 
There is not enough information, not e nough fundamentals. Just nothing going on. 
In the commodity markets, technical information is basically confined to price, volume, and 
open interest. Since th ere is so much more technical info rmation available for stock indexes—
advance/decline ratios, various sentiment indica tors, relationships between different groups 
of stocks, etc.—do ordinary trend-following sy stems start off at a big disadvantage because  55they don't use enough information? 
I'm not sure that is the disadvantag e. I think the disadvantage is that  stock index prices are too close 
to random to develop enough clear-cut trends b ecause the inputs—the individual stocks—are 
mostly random. 
What are your thoughts on the rec ent attacks against program trading? 
The people that are complaining ought  to be ashamed of themselves.  
Do you mean people in the financial community? 
Yes. They should have enough sophistication to  understand the inanity of what they are 
complaining about. 
Do you see program trading as a conven ient scapegoat for a declining market? 
Sure. It is a good excuse for doing a lousy job fo r yourself and your clients. The claim is that 
program traders are taking money out of the pockets  of the people who are investing in the stock 
market. Nothing could be further from the trut h. Program trading may move the stock market 
around a bit, but not in any systematic way. If progr am trading caused prices to go too high or too 
low, that should provide better opportunities for the value investor . Of course, it's bad for those 
people who pretend they are value in vestors, but are really traders. 
How do you handle a losing streak? 
Cut back. If it is really bad, stop and get out. 
Do you sometimes need to get away from the markets for a few days? 
Generally, it just takes a day or two, but you do need to stop for a period of time. It is almost like a 
pitcher not balking. Before he throws the ball, he ha s to stop at least for that second. That is what I 
try to do—at least have a pause.  It could be for just one day. 
What is the biggest public fa llacy about market behavior? 
That markets are supposed to make sense. 
How about fallacies regardi ng technical analysis? 
The belief that technical factors are not as important as the fundamentals. 
Are there any analysts whose work you respect? 
There are a lot of them/Zweig) for example, is good. 
Would you consider the work of outside analysts as an input in a trade? 
No. When we taught our people to trade, I ha d a hypothetical question: Suppose everything you 
know about the markets indicates a "buy." Then you call the floor and they tell you that I'm selling. 
Do you: (a) buy, (b) go short, (c) do nothing? If they didn't even tually understand  that (a) was 
correct because they have to make their own market  decisions, then they di dn't fit into the program. 
Why do you handle other people's money? You are doing very well on your own. 
Well, there is one big advantage: managed money of fers potential return with no risk. For ten years, 
people have been asking me if I'm getting tired of all the risk. Do I think I'm going to bum out? Do 
I think I'm going to stop? For the longest time I didn't understand what they were talking about. But 
I have to admit, at this point, I understand the value of cutting down your own risk. I could have 
traded smaller and had a smaller profit and smalle r risk. But if customer money comes in, I could 
use that to supplement the profitabil ity and still keep my risk lower. It just gives you a better deal. 
In a later interview, Dennis changed his mi nd on this subject, possi bly influenced by the 
aggravation related to large losses  in his public funds. Dennis decide d to extricate hi mself gradually 
from the money management business, saying: "I found that it was more trouble than it was worth. 
The costs were not financial; they were psychologi cal." The material that follows is from that 
second interview. 
I know this is not going to be your favorite subj ect, but I've got to ask you about it. Some of 
the public funds you managed ceased trading in April 1988. Is that because they reached the 
automatic 50 percent loss cutoff point? 
Actually, they were down just under 49 percent when we stopped trading. Rather than trigger the  56automatic termination point, we liquidated all pos itions and resolicited the investors to allow a 
lower cutoff point. 
Would you do anything differently in the futu re because of this particular experience? 
I would cut back a little faster than I did, but the trades would st ill be the same. Someone said to 
me, "You claim the markets were bad. Well, si nce you could have done the exact opposite and 
made a lot of money, weren't they really good?" I told hi m that the last thing I would have wanted 
to do was to be on the oppos ite side of those trades. In the long ran, that is a way to lose an infinite 
amount of money. 
The short side of the interest rate markets in October 1987 resulted in one of your worst 
losses. What went wrong there? 
A large part of that loss was due to the fact that  the market gapped way past  our point for covering 
our short position. For example, on October 20, we would normally have been out of our short 
Eurodollar position about 40 to 50 points higher, but the market opened 240 points higher that day. 
We blew 190 points in a skid th at was absolutely unavoidable. 
If the market is that much out of line, do you still get out of your position right away? 
Sure. If you have any doubt about getting out as fast as possible in a situati on like that, then you are 
really in big trouble. 
Do you think the sharp losses you suffered were due to any change in the markets? 
That's hard to say. The only factor  I can objectively identify is the tendency toward more false 
breakouts. 
Do you feel the recent prevalence of false breakouts is related to  the tremendous increase in 
computerized trend-following trading during the past five to ten years? Are there just too 
many people doing the same thin g, getting in each other's way? 
Yes, there is no doubt about it. In  a perverse sort of way, it repr esents the ultimate triumph of 
technical trading over fundamental trading. I say perverse because it  is a victory that devalues 
technical trading. 
Do you think we may see the day when trend-following systems no longer work? 
There will come a day when easily discovered and lightly conceived tr end-following systems no 
longer work. It is going to be harder to develop good systems. 
Given that, can the approaches you were using before still work with  the same efficacy? 
Actually, I believe that if you vi ew the problem correctly, you can make the fact that there are 
many other trend followers in the market work to your advantage. I can't get too specific about the 
solution, because if we are right, that is pretty valuable informa tion. To be successful you always 
have to be one step ahead of everyone else. 
It sounds like you started working on this problem well before your performance problems 
began in late 1987. 
That's right. During the past ten years, there ha s been a virtual bandwagon-effect of people using 
trend-following approaches. We have been thinki ng about this problem for a long time. Half the 
work in solving a problem is finding the right way to  conceptualize it. It t ook us years before we 
figured out the right questions to ask. 
When did you finally arrive at what you considered a satisfactory solution? 
Ironically, right around the time we  closed down the public funds. 
I know you can't be specific, but does your solu tion to false breakouts involve being far more 
short-term oriented, so th at you can respond more quickly to those situations? 
The secret is being as short term or as long te rm as you can stand, dependi ng on your trading style. 
It is the intermediate term that picks up the vast majority of trend followers. The best strategy is to 
avoid the middle like the plague. 
When you talk about the experience of managi ng well over $100 million and losing roughly 50 
percent, not to mention your personal large lo sses, you discuss it with great emotional  57detachment. Do you really take it that calm ly? Isn't there an emotional side to it? 
I try for there not to be. It is totally counter productive to get wrapped up in the results. Trading 
decisions should be made as unemotionally as possible. 
Yes, but how do you do that? 
You have to maintain your perspective. There is  more to life than trading. Also, to me, being 
emotionally deflated would mean lacking confidence in what I am doing. I avoid that because I 
have always felt that it is mislead ing to focus on short-term results. 
So you are able to avoid the emotional trap? 
Yes, but the flip side is that I also avoid the em otional elation when things are going well. There is 
no way to play just one side of that street. If  you feel too good when things are going well, then 
inevitably you will feel too bad when they are go ing poorly. I wouldn't claim that I realized that 
after three years of trading, but after you've done it for twenty years, it e ither drives you crazy, or 
you learn to put it into perspective. 
Does it become easier after twenty years? 
Not necessarily [he laughs]. It gets easier to put it into perspective, but everyone has shock 
absorbers that deteriorate over time. Being a trader  is like being a boxer: Every now and then, the 
market gives you a good wallop. After twenty years you get a bit punch-drunk. 
Is there any advice you can give to other trad ers on how to stay emotionally calm during 
periods of trading losses? 
It is a little bit like playi ng golf: You can throw your clubs around after making a bad shot, but 
while you are making the next shot you should keep your head down and your eye on the ball. 
Do you use long-term scenarios about economic growth, inflation, and the dollar in making 
your trading decisions? 
I have mental pictures, but I try not to use them when I'm trading. Trading to me is like betting on 
independent roles of the dice that you think are loaded a little bit in your favor, because you know 
some statistical things about th e market. Long-term scenarios can prove to be right or wrong, but 
even if they are right, on balance, I'm not convin ced that they make much  difference over the term 
of any individual trade. 
Even if you think the dollar is going to colla pse, that doesn't affect your basic trading 
pattern? 
I would like to say it doesn't, and I don't think it should, but it probably has in the past. The worst 
thing you can do is miss a profit opportunity (assuming you are al ready disciplined enough to cut 
your losses short). And if you think about it, rigid long-term views ar e the kind of thing most likely 
to lead you to that mistake. For example, if I be lieve the dollar is going to weaken, and because of 
this I ignore a sell signal in the fo reign currencies, I might risk mi ssing a large profit. What is my 
reward if my view was right? Avoiding a small loss.  Therefore, the risk/rew ard is all wrong for my 
type of trading. 
Acknowledging that caveat, as a long-time mark et observer, what major trends do you see 
shaping up over the coming years? 
I bet we will be at record levels of inflati on by the end of 1990. [This interview was conducted in 
mid-1988.] 
What is going to be the driving force behind that inflation? 
It is going to be driven by trying to avoid a de ep recession. The recession is going to be caused by 
the federal budget deficit as invest ors require higher and higher levels  of real interest rates to buy 
the debt. The' government will try to avoid the recession by stim ulating the economy, a tactic 
which essentially doesn't work. 
In other words, fear of a recessi on will cause tremendous moneta ry easing, which in turn will 
lead to inflation? 
It is, unfortunately, a very Republican idea, but I think it is right. Whethe r you like it or not, the 
financial markets are in conservative hands. People who lend money to the government and  58business will not buy monetary eas ing as a soluti on to a recession. 
Are you implying that the defici t problem is just a time bomb , which will eventually shatter 
the economy? 
Sure. We tend to think that since it is not a pr oblem now, that means it won't be. We expect 
continuity in our lives, but the economy, and certainly the markets, are more  discontinuous than 
continuous. 
And you are saying that people lo ok at the deficit year after year  and think, "Well, it can't be 
so bad, the economy is strong," and one day everybody wakes up— 
It is like having termites in th e foundation of your house. You ma y not notice them until one day 
they gnaw away a big chunk and the house collapse s. I don't think any body should take a large 
amount of comfort in the fact that th ings appear to be holding together. 
Hypothetically, if you were President and coul d influence change, would the deficit be the 
first thing you would change? 
Sure. I think it is especially important for Democrat s, since they were the fi rst ones to pick up the 
banner of Keynesianism [the advocacy of government programs to increase employment], to admit 
that while it may be a great theor y, it doesn't work in the real world. 
I don't think Keynes ever proposed using defi cit spending in strong economic times. 
No, that's true. He proposed surp luses that were supposed to be  countercyclical to deficits. 
Surpluses in good times; deficits in bad times. The trouble is that we have  only one side of that 
equation because of the lack of political will to  create the surpluses wh en times are good. So what 
we really ought to do is admit that Keynesian economics is just an excuse for easy money, 
overspending, and overconsuming. We ought to just ad mit that the government is a debt junkie and 
the whole concept of deficit sp ending is flawed in practice. 
You mean Keynesianism as it is being app lied, not Keynesian econo mics as he himself 
purported it? 
The theory is fine, it just doesn't work in the real world. Therefore, we shouldn't use it. Besides, 
Keynesian economics was a solution to the pr oblem of oversaving and underconsumption, which 
was a fair enough attempt to pull us out of the Great Depression. The problem  now is the exact 
opposite: undersaving and overconsum ption. Even if Keynesianism were politically tenable, you 
still need a different solution becaus e you have the exact opposite problem. 
Is there an economic theory that you f eel fits the times and makes sense? 
We have to get rid of deficit spending. We need to retire the deficit in some orderly way, and the 
federal government should have to balance its budget just as the st ates do. At that  point, Milton 
Friedman's proposal for a constant  money supply adjusted by a grow th factor would probably be a 
good idea. 
What is the most important advice  you could give the novice trader? 
Trade small because that's when you are as bad as you are ever going to be. Learn from your 
mistakes. Don't be misled by the day-to-day fluctu ations in your equity. Focus on whether what you 
are doing is right, not on the random na ture of any single trade's outcome. 
After Dennis announced his retirement from trading to pursue his political interests full time, I 
called with some follow-up questions. I spoke to an aide who took down the questions. Several 
days later, he called back with Dennis' re plies. These questions and answers follow. 
Individuals who invested in your funds durin g your final year as a money manager fared 
poorly. How would an investor ha ve done if he started on you r first day as a money manager 
and kept his money fully invested until your last day in that role? 
Each $1,000 invested would have been worth $3,833 when the accounts were closed. [This works 
out to approximately a 25 percent annual compounde d return. The figure would have been more 
than double that at the equity peak about one year earlier.] 
You are rumored to have lost a very substantial portion of your own net worth during your 
final year of trading. Are thes e stories true or exaggerated?  59I lost about 10 percent of the money I had made  in the markets. Of course, measured as a 
percentage of my net worth, the figure is much  higher because of my charitable and political 
contributions over the years. 
Did your poor trading results during the pa st year speed your career transitions? 
It made no difference. 
Have you really gone cold turkey, or are you still trading lightly? 
I am not trading at all. 
Richard Dennis is one of the legendary commodity tr aders of our time. He is the type of trader you 
might visualize implementing large long positions near market bottoms and large short positions 
near market tops. It is thus su rprising that Dennis downplays the value of trying to pick major 
turning points. In fact, he claims that such trades have done little, if anything, to contribute to his 
trading success. 
Dennis believes that one of the worst mistakes a trader can make is to miss a major profit 
opportunity. According to his own estimate, 95 pe rcent of his profits have come from only 5 
percent of his trades. Missing only a few such pr ofit opportunities could ha ve a dramatic negative 
impact on performance. As a corollary, you need to  guard against holding too rigid an opinion on a 
market, since such an opinion could easily lead to missing a major trend. 
One particularly useful piece of advice offered by  Dennis is that the times  when you least want to 
think about trading—the losing pe riods—are precisely the times wh en you need to focus most on 
trading. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  60Paul Tudor Jones-The Art of Aggressive Trading 
October 1987 was a devastating month for most i nvestors as the world stock markets witnessed a 
collapse that rivaled 1929. That same month, th e Tudor Futures Fund, managed by Paul Tudor 
Jones, registered an incredible 62 percent retur n. Jones has always been a maverick trader. His 
trading style is unique and his performance is uncorrelated with other money managers. Perhaps 
most important, he has done what many thought impo ssible: combine five consecutive, triple-digit 
return years with very low equity retracements. (I  am fudging slightly; in 1986, Paul's fund realized 
only a 99.2 percent gain!) 
Jones has succeeded in every major venture he has tried. He started out in the business as a broker 
and in his second year grossed over $1 million in commissions. In fall 1980, Jones went to the New 
York Cotton Exchange as an independent floor trader. Again he was spectacularly successful, 
making millions during the next few years. His r eally impressive achievement though was not the 
magnitude of his winnings, but the consistency of  his performance: During his three and a half 
years as a floor trader, he witnessed only one losing month. 
In 1984, partially out of boredom, and partially out of fear of eventually losing his voice—an 
occupational hazard for a pit trader— Jones agai n abandoned his successful career for a new 
venture: money management. He launched the Tudor Futures Fund in September 1984 with $1.5 
million under management. At the end of Oct ober 1988, each $1,000 invested in this fund was 
worth $17,482, while the total amount of money he  managed had grown to $330 million. In fact, 
the amount under management would have b een higher, but Jones stopped accepting new 
investment funds in October 1987 and has also  made cash disbursements since that time. 
If one believes in cycles—as Jones does—it appears that he is due fo r another career change. It is 
hard to imagine what he can do for an encore. 
Jones is a compendium of contrasts.  In private conversation he is re laxed, but as a trader he shouts 
his orders with the ferocity of a drill sergeant. His public image is  one of a swaggering, egotistical 
trader, but one-on-one he is  easygoing and unassuming. The medi a usually dramatizes the 
flamboyant elements of his lifestyle—Chesa peake Bay Mansion, private 3,000-acre wildlife 
preserve, beautiful women, fine restaurants—but he has also made helping the poor a second 
avocation. 
Jones has emulated New York businessman E ugene Lang by setting up a fund to finance the 
college education of eighty-five elementary sc hool graduates in Brooklyn's economically depressed 
Bedford-Stuyvesant section. This is not merely  a matter of donating money; Jones has become 
personally involved by meeting with  his adopted students weekly. More recently, he started the 
Robin Hood Foundation, whose endowment has grown to $5 million. This organization, true to its 
name, raises money from the rich and distributes it to private groups and indivi duals working to aid 
the poor. 
Jones had arranged our interview for 3:15 P.M., a time by which all the futures markets are closed, 
except for the stock indexes. Even with only one market trading, I was a little concerned about the 
practicality of starting the interv iew at that time, since I knew that the S&P stock index futures 
contract was one of Jones' primary trading vehicles . In fact, when I arrived he was in the midst of 
trading the S&P. 
I waited until he finished shouting orders over the speakerphone and explaine d that I did not want 
to interrupt his trading. "Maybe we  should delay the interview until th e market closes," I suggested. 
"No problem," he answered, "let's go." 
As it turned out, Jones was not merely trading the S&P that afternoon, he  was building up a major 
position in anticipation of  a huge break in the stock market. There is an intensity in Jones' 
placement of an order that is reminiscent of a te nnis player aggressively returning a volley. ("Buy 
300 at even! Go, go, go! Are we in? Speak to me!") Yet, he shifted easily between trading and our 
conversation. 
Jones speaks with admiration abou t his first tutor in the business,  the legendary co tton trader, Eli 
Tullis. Perhaps the one trait of Tullis that made the greatest impression on Jones was his steel-hard 
emotional control. He recalls how  Tullis could carry on a polite, relaxed conversation with visitors, 
without blinking an eye, at the same time his positions were getting decimated in the market.  61Jones' casualness in seeing visitors, talking to his staff, and participating in this interview at the 
same time he was trading a heavy S&P position reflected the same trait. A rally in stock index 
futures in the closing minutes of trading that day caused over a $ 1 million loss in Jones' position. 
Yet, he was so composed that I didn't realize th e market had moved agains t him until I checked the 
closing prices later that day. 
There was insufficient time to complete the inte rview at our first meeti ng. I returned about two 
weeks later. Two things were notable about this se cond meeting. First, wh ereas he had been 
strongly bearish and heavily short the stock market  at the time of our first conversation, Jones' 
short-term opinion on the stock market had shifted to bullish in the interim. The failure of the stock 
market to follow through on the downside at the pr ice and time he had anticipated convinced him 
that the market was headed higher for the short term. 
"This market is sold out," he emphasized at our second meeting. Th is 180-degree sh ift in opinion 
within a short time span exemplified the extreme flexibility that underlies Jones' trading success. 
He not only quickly abandoned his original position, but was willing to join the other side once the 
evidence indicated his initial pr ojection was wrong. (Yes, his change  of heart proved well timed.) 
Second, Jones had suddenly adopted a very cautious tone regarding projecti ons p Ttaining to the 
stock market and the economy. He was concerned that a second major selling wave in the stock 
market—the first being October 1987—could lead to  a type of financial Mc-Carthyism. Indeed, 
there is historical precedence fo r such concern: During the Sena te hearings held  in the 1930s, 
committee members were so desperat e to find villain s responsible for the 1929 stock crash that they 
dragged up New York Stock Exch ange officials who had held long positions du ring the price 
collapse. 
Jones feared that, as a prominent speculator and forecaster of economic tr ends, he might make a 
convenient target for any future governmental witch- hunts. Jones had been part icularly rattled by a 
call from a prominent government official regard ing his trading. "You wouldn't believe how high-
placed this person was," he explained to me in a voice tinged with incredulity, taking particular 
care not to divulge anything specific. 
Although Jones remained friendly, the directness of the first interview was replaced by an almost 
prerecorded quality in his replies. For example,  a question about trading strategy was met with a 
response about frmit-running^-an illegal prac tice in which a broker places his own order 
m^ront~oralarge customer order. This reply virtua lly bordered on the absurd  since Jones handles no 
customer orders. It made as much sense as a f ootball fan, who bets in his office pool, denying that 
he took a bribe to throw the game. It sounded as if Jones was using the interview as a forum for 
making an official statement, perhaps to be used as evidence in some hypothetical future 
congressional hearing. I thought that Jones wa s being overly cautious—if not paranoid—but then 
again, the expectation that a true economic crisis  would lead to "killin g the messengers of bad 
news" does not really seem that far-fetched. 
When did you first get interested in trading? 
When I was in college I read an article on Rich ard Dennis, which made a big impression on me. I 
thought that Dennis had the greate st job in the world. I already had an appreciation for trading 
because my uncle, Billy Dunavant, was a very su ccessful cotton trader. In 1976, after I finished 
college, I went to my uncle and asked him if he coul d help me get started as a trader. He sent me to 
Eli Tullis, a famous cotton trader, w ho lived in New Orleans. "Eli is the best trader I know," he told 
me. I went down to see Eli and he offered me a job on the floor of the New York Cotton Exchange. 
How come you went to work for Eli instead of your uncle? 
Because my uncle was primarily involved in the cash side of the business, merchandising cotton. I 
was interested in becoming a trader straightaway. 
How long did you work on the floor of the exchange? What was your job there? 
I was a floor clerk; that is how everybody begins. But I also did a lo t of analytical work, watching 
the market to try to figure out what made it tick.  I clerked in New York for about six months and 
then returned to New Orleans to work for Eli. 
Did you learn a lot about trading from Eli?  62Absolutely. Working with Eli was a fabulous e xperience. He would trade position sizes of 3,000 
contracts when the entire mark et open interest was only 30,000. He would trade more volume than 
any cotton trader off the floor. He was a true sight to behold. 
Was he trading futures against cash or just speculating? 
He was a pure speculator. The am azing thing was that since he us ed his own broker on the floor, 
everyone always knew exactly what his position was.  He was very easy to tag. Eli's attitude was, 
"The hell with it, I'm goi ng to take them head on." 
So everyone knew his hand? 
Definitely. 
But, apparently, it didn't hurt him? 
No. 
Is that an exception? Do you try to hide your positions? 
I try. But, realistically, the guys in  the pit who have been there for five or ten years know it is me. 
Everyone knows when I trade. The one thing I learne d from Eli is that, ultimately, the market is 
going to go where it is going to go. 
So you don't think it is impo rtant to hide your positions? 
I think it is important to make an effort. For instance, my orders used  to be particularly easy to read 
because I traded in multiples of 300 contracts. Now I break my orders up; I might give one broker 
an order for 116 and another broker an order for 184.1 have at least four brokers in every pit. 
What else did you learn from Tullis? 
He was the toughest son of a bitch I ever knew. He  taught me that trading is very competitive and 
you have to be able to handl e getting your butt kicked. No matter how you cut it, there are 
enormous emotional ups and downs involved. 
That sounds like a general character-buildin g lesson. What about specifics regarding 
trading? 
Tullis taught me about moving volume. When you are trading size, you have to get out when the 
market lets you out, not when you want to get out. He  taught me that if you want to move a large 
position, you don't wait until the market is in ne w high or low ground because very little volume 
may trade there if it is a turning point. 
One thing I learned as a floor tr ader was that if, for example, the old high was at 56.80, there are 
probably going to be a lot of buy stops at 56.85. If  the market is trading 70 aid, 75 offered, the 
whole trading ring has a vested interest in buying the market, touchi ng off those stops, and 
liquidating into the stops—that is a very common ring practice. As an upstairs trader, I put that 
together with what Eli taught me. If I want to c over a position in that type of situation, I will 
liquidate half at 75, so that I won't have to worry about getting out of the en tire position at the point 
where the stops are being hit. I will always liquida te half my position below new highs or lows and 
the remaining half beyond that point. 
Any other lessons you can attribute to Tullis? 
By watching Eli, I learned that even though markets look their very best when they are setting new 
highs, that is often th e best time to sell. He inst illed in me the idea that, to  some extent, to be a good 
trader, you have to be a contrarian. 
You have done tens of thousands of trades. Is there any single trade that stands out? 
Yes, the 1979 cotton market. One leams the most fr om mistakes, not successes. I was a broker back 
then. We had lots of speculative accounts and I was long about 400 contracts of July cotton. The 
market had been trading in a range between 82 and 86 cents, and I was buying it every time it came 
down to the low end of that range. 
One day, the market broke to new lows, took out the stops, and immediatel y rebounded about 30 or 
40 points. I thought the reason the market had been acting so poorly was because of the price 
vulnerability implied by the prox imity of those well-known stops. Now that the stops had been 
touched off, I thought the ma rket was ready to rally.  63I was standing outside the ring at th e time. In an act of bravado, I to ld my floor broker to bid 82.90 
for 100 July, which at the time was a very big or der. He bid 90 for 100, a nd I remember the Refco 
broker came running across the pit sc reaming, "Sold!" Refco owned mo st of the certificated stock 
at that time [the type of cotton available for delive ry against the contract]. In an instant I realized 
that they intended to deliver agai nst the July contract, which then  was trading at about a 4-cent 
premium to the October contract. It also dawned on me that the whole congestion pattern that had 
formed between 82 and 86 cents was going to be a market measurement for the next move down 
[the break from 82 cents was going to equal the width of the prior 4-cent trading range]. 
So you knew you were wrong immediately? 
I saw immediately that the market was going strai ght down to 78 cents, and that it was my blood 
that was going to carry it there. I had come in long 400 cont racts, entered another 100 as a day 
trade, and a final 100 on that macho-type  bid that I should never have made. 
So you realized instantly that you wanted to be out. 
No, I realized instantly that  I wanted to be short.  
How fast did you react? 
Almost immediately. When the Refco broker shout ed, "Sold," everyone in the ring turned around 
and looked at me, because they knew what I was tr ying to do. The guy standing next to me said, "If 
you want to go to the bathroom, do it right here."  He said I looked three shades of white. I 
remember turning around, walking out , getting a drink of water, and then telling my broker to sell 
as much as he could. The market was limit-down in sixty seconds, and I was only able to sell 220 
contracts. 
When did you get out of the rest of your position? 
The next morning the market opened 100 points lowe r and I started selling from the opening bell. I 
sold only about 150 contracts before the market locked limit-down again. By the time it was all 
over, I ended up selling some contracts as much as  4 cents below the point I first knew the position 
was no good. 
Even though you reacted fairly quickly, you still took a big hit. In retrospect, what should you 
have done? 
First of all, never play macho man with the market. Second, neve r overtrade. My major problem 
was not the number of points I lo st on the trade, but that I wa s trading far too many contracts 
relative to the equity in the accounts that I handled. My account s lost something like 60 to 70 
percent of their equity in that single trade. 
Did that particular trade change your whole trading style in terms of risk? 
Absolutely. I was totally demoralized. I said, "I am  not cut out for this business; I don't think I can 
hack it much longer." I was so depressed that I nearly quit. 
How many years had you been in  the business at that time? 
Only about three and a half years. 
Had you been successful up to that point? 
Relatively. Most of my clients had made money, and I was an im portant producer for my company. 
How about someone who had given you $10,000 at the beginning of the three-year period? 
They were probably up about threefold. 
So everyone who was with you for a lo ng time was still ahead of the game? 
Yes, but I had to suffer some intense drawdowns during the interim. That cotton trade was almost 
the deal-breaker for me. It was at that point th at I said, "Mr. Stupid, why risk everything on one 
trade? Why not make your life a purs uit of happiness rath er than pain?" 
That was when I first decided I had to learn disc ipline and money management. It was a cathartic 
experience for me, in the sense that I went to the edge, questioned my very ability as a trader, and 
decided that I was not going to quit. I was determin ed to come back and fight. I decided that I was 
going to become very disciplined and businesslike about my trading.  64Did your trading style change ra dically from that point on? 
Yes. Now I spend my day trying to  make myself as happy and re laxed as I can be. If I have 
positions going against me, I get right out; if they are going forme, I keep them. 
I guess you not only started tradi ng smaller, but also quicker? 
Quicker and more defensive. I am always thi nking about losing money as opposed to making 
money. Back then, in that cotton trade, I had a vision of July going to 89 cents and I thought about 
all the money I was going to make on 400 contra cts. I didn't think about what I could lose. 
Do you always know where you are gett ing out before you put a trade on? 
I have a mental stop. If it hits that number, I am out no matter what. How much do you risk on any 
single trade? 
I don't break it down trade by trade. All the trades I have on are interrela ted. I look at it in terms of 
what my equity is each morning. My goal is to fi nish each day with more than I started. Tomorrow 
morning I will not walk in and say, "I am short th e S&P from 264 and it closed at 257 yesterday; 
therefore, I can stand a rally." I always think of it in terms of being short from the previous night's 
close. 
Risk control is the most important thing in trad ing. For example, right now  I am down about 6'/ 2 
percent for the топшТТНауе  а З'б percent stop on my equity for th e rest of the month. I want to 
make sure that I never have a double-digit loss in any month. 
One aspect of your trading style is a contrarian  attempt to buy and sell turning points. Let's 
say you are looking for a top and go short with a close stop when the market reaches a new 
high. You then get stopped out. On a single trade idea, how many times will you try to pick a 
turning point before you give up? 
Until I change my mind, fundamentally. Otherwise, I will keep cutting my position size down as I 
have losing trades. When I am trading poorly, I k eep reducing my position size.  That way, I will be 
trading my smallest position size when my trading is worst. 
What are the trading rules you live by? 
Don't ever average losers. Decrease your tradi ng volume when you are trading poorly; increase 
your volume when you are trading well. Never trade in situations where you don't have control. For 
example, I don't risk significant amounts of money in front of key reports, since that is gambling, 
not trading. 
If you have a losing position that is making you uncomfortable, the solution is very simple: Get out, 
because you can always get back in. There is nothing better than a fresh start. 
Don't be too concerned about where you got into a position. The only relevant question is whether 
you are bullish or bearish on the position that day. Al ways think of your entry point as last night's 
close. I can always tell a rookie trader because he  will ask me, "Are you s hort or long?" Whether I 
am long or short should have no bearing on his market opinion. Next he will ask (assuming I have 
told him I am long), "Where are you long from?"  Who cares where I am long from. That has no 
relevance to whether the market environment is bu llish or bearish right now, or to the risk/reward 
balance of a long position at that moment. 
The most important rale of trading is to play gr eat defense, not great offe nse. Every day I assume 
every position I have is wrong. I know where my stop ri sk points are going to be. I do that so I can 
define my maximum possible drawdown. Hopefully, I spend the rest of the day enjoying positions 
that are going in my direction. If they are going against me, then I ha ve a game plan for getting out. 
Don't be a hero. Don't have an ego. Always ques tion yourself and your abilit y. Don't ever feel that 
you are very good. The second you do, you are dead. 
Jesse Livermore, one of the greatest speculators of all time, reportedly sa id that, in the long ran, 
you can't ever win trading markets. That was a de vastating quote for someone like me, just getting 
into the business. The idea that you can't beat the ma rkets is a frightening pr ospect. That is why my 
guiding philosophy is playing great defense. If you make a good trade, don't think it is because you 
have some uncanny foresight. Always maintain your  sense of confidence, but keep it in check. 
But you have been very successful for years. Aren't you more confiden t now than you were 
before? 
I am more scared now than I was at any point  since I began trading, because I recognize how  65ephemeral success can be in this business. I know that  to be successful, I have to be frightened. My 
biggest hits have always come after I have had a great period and I started to think that I knew 
something. 
My impression is that you of ten implement positions near ma rket turns. Sometimes your 
precision has been uncanny. What is it about you r decision-making process that allows you to 
get in so close to the turns? 
I have very strong views of the l ong-ran direction of all markets. I also have a very short-term 
horizon for pain. As a result, frequently, I may try repeated trades from the long side over a period 
of weeks in a market which continues to move lower. 
Is it a matter of doing a series of  probes until you finally hit it? 
Exactly. I consider myself a premier market opportunist. That means I develop an idea on the 
market and pursue it from a very-low-risk standpoi nt until I have repeatedly  been proven wrong, or 
until I change my viewpoint. 
In other words, it makes a better story to say, "Paul Jones buys the T-bond market 2 ticks 
from the low," rather than, "On his fifth try, Paul Jones buys th e T-bond market 2 ticks from 
its low." 
I think that is certainly part of it. The other part is that I have always been a swing trader, meaning 
that I believe the very best money is to be made  at the market turns. Ev eryone says you get killed 
trying to pick tops and bottoms and you make a ll the money by catching the trends in the middle. 
Well, for twelve years, I have of ten been missing the meat in the middle, but I have caught a lot of 
bottoms and tops. 
If you are a trend follower trying to catch the profits  in the middle of a move, you have to use very 
wide stops. I'm not comfortable doing that. Also, markets trend onl y about 15 percent of the time; 
the rest of the time they move sideways. 
What is the most prominent fallacy in  the public's percepti on about markets? 
That markets can be manipulated. That there is so me group on Wall Street that controls price action 
in the markets. I can go into any market and create  a stir for a day or two, maybe even a week. If I 
go into a market at just the right moment, by gi ving it a little gas on the upside, I can create the 
illusion of a bull market. But, unless the market is  really sound, the second I stop buying, the price 
is going to come right down. You can open the most beautiful Saks  Fifth Avenue in Anchorage, 
Alaska, with a wonderful summer menswear de partment, but unless somebody wants to buy the 
clothes, you will go broke. 
What other misconceptions do people have about the markets? 
The idea that people affiliated with Wall Street know  something. My mother is a classic example. 
She watches "Wall Street Week" and she takes everyt hing they say with almost a religious fervor. I 
would bet that you could probably fade "Wall Street Week." 
I know you talk to traders in virtually every ma jor market on an almost daily basis. Are you 
uncomfortable about being on the opposite  side of the fence from these people? 
Yes. Who wants to fade a winner? I want to be with them because I make a point of talking to the 
people who have the best track records. 
How do you keep all these other opinions from  confusing your own vision? Let's say you are 
bearish on a market and 75 percent of the people you talk to about that market are bullish. What 
do you do?  
I wait. I will give you a perfect example. Until last Wednesday, I had been bearish on crude oil, 
while it was in the midst of a $2 advance. The best crude oil trader I know was bullish during that 
period. Because he was bullish, I never went short. Then the market started to stall and one day he 
said, "I think I am going to go flat here." I knew that instant— particular ly, given the fact that 
bullish news was coming out of OPEC right at that time—that crude oil was a low-risk short. I sold 
the hell out of it, and it turn ed out to be a great trade. 
Are there any market advisors that you pay attention to?  66Marty Zweig and Ned Davis are great; Bob Prechter  is the champion. Prechter is the best because 
he is the ultimate market opportunist. 
What do you mean by opportunist? 
The reason he has been so successful is that the Elliott Wave theory allows one to create incredibly 
favorable risk/reward opportunities. That is the sa me reason I attribute a lot of my own success to 
the Elliott Wave approach. 
Any advisor you consider underrated? 
I think Ned Davis does the best research on the stock market that I have seen. Although he is well 
known, I don't think he has received the recognition he deserves. 
Any analysts you consider overrated? 
Judge not, least you be judged. 
Very few traders have reached your level of  achievement. What makes you different? 
I think one of my strengths is that I view anythi ng that has happened up to the present point in time 
as history. I really don't care about the mistake I ma de three seconds ago in the market. What I care 
about is what I am going to do from the next mome nt on. I try to avoid any emotional attachment to 
a market. I avoid letting my trading opinions be influenced by comments I may have made on the 
record about a market. 
No loyalty to positions is obviously an important element in your trading. 
It is important because it gives you a wide open intellectual horiz on to figure out what is really 
happening. It allows you to come in with a comple tely clean slate in choosing the correct forecast 
for that particular market. 
Has the tremendous growth of the money you are managing made it more difficult to trade at 
the same level of profitability? 
It has made it tremendously more difficult. 
Do you think you could make a substantially higher percentage return  if you were trading 
smaller amounts of money? 
Without question. 
Do you ever question whether the detrimental impact of size on your performance outweighs 
profit incentive fees you earn from managing money? 
I think about that question every day. It is going to  be interesting to see what happens by the time 
your book is published. 
Have you stopped accepting new investment funds? 
Yes, a long time ago. 
You have been both a broker and a money ma nager. How do you compare the relative 
advantages and disadvantages of these two jobs? 
I got out of the brokerage business because I felt there was a gross conflict of interest: If you are 
charging a client commissions and he loses mone y, you aren't penalized. I went into the money 
management business because if I lost money, I wa nted to be able to say that I had not gotten 
compensated for it. In fact, it would probably co st me a bundle because I have an overhead that 
would knock out the Bronx Zoo. I never apologize to anybody, because I don't get paid unless I 
win. 
Do you keep your money in your own funds? 
I would say that 85 percent of my net worth is invested in my own fu nds, primarily because I 
believe that is the safest place in the world for it. I really believe that I am going to be so defensive 
and conservative that I will get my money back. 
You did extraordinarily well during October 1987, a month which was a disaster for many 
other traders. Could you fill in some of the details? 
The week of the crash was one of th e most exciting periods of my life. 
We had been expecting a major stock market collapse since mid-1986 and had contingency plans  67drawn up because of the possibility we foresaw for a financial meltdown. When we came in on 
Monday, October 19, we knew that the ma rket was going to crash that day. 
What made you so sure? 
Because the previous Friday was a record volume day on the downside. The exact same thing 
happened in 1929, two days before the crash. Our analog model to 1929 had the coll apse perfectly 
nailed. [Paul Jones' analog model, developed by hi s research director, Pete r Borish, superimposed 
the 1980s market over the 1920s mark et. The two markets demonstrated a remarkable degree of 
correlation. This model was a key tool in Jone s' stock index tradin g during 1987.] Treasury 
Secretary Baker's weekend statement that the U.S.  would no longer support th e dollar beca use of its 
disagreements with West Germany was the kiss of death for the market. 
When did you cover your short position? 
We actually covered our shorts and went somewhat  long on the close of the day of the crash itself 
[October 19]. 
Were most of your profits in October due  to your short stock index position? 
No, we also had an extremely profitable bond positi on. The day of the crash we put on the biggest 
bond position we ever had. The bond market had been  acting terrible all day long on October 19. 
During the day, I was very concerne d about the financial safety of our clients' and our own assets. 
We had our assets with various commission houses on the street, and I thought those funds could be 
in jeopardy. It was an into lerable situation for me. 
I kept on thinking: What is the Fed reaction going to be? I t hought that thev would have to add 
massive amounts of liquidity to create a very ro sy environment, instantaneously. However, since 
bonds had been acting poorly all day, I couldn't bring myself to pull the trigger on a long bond 
position. During the last half hour of  trading, bonds suddenly started to  turn up, and it clicked in my 
mind that the Fed was going to take actions that  would create a tremendous upsurge in bond prices. 
As soon as I saw the bond market ac t right for a moment, I went wild. 
Do you believe that October 1987 was an early wa rning signal of more negative times ahead? 
I think the financial community, particularly Wall Street, was d ealt a life-threatening blow on 
October 19, but they are in shock and don't realize it. I remember the time I got run over by a boat, 
and my backside was chewed up by the propeller. My  first thought was, "Damm it, I just ruined my 
Sunday afternoon because I have to get stitched up." Because I was in shock, I didn't even realize 
how badly cut up I was until I saw the faces of my friends. 
Everything gets destroyed a hundred times faster than  it is built up. It takes one day to tear down 
something that might have taken ten years to buil d. If the economy starts to  go with the kind of 
leverage that is in it, it will deteriorate so fast that people's heads will spin. I hate to believe it, but 
in my gut that is what I think is going to happen. 
I know from studying history that cr edit eventually kills all great societies. We ha ve essentially 
taken out our American Express card and said we ar e going to have a great time. Reagan made sure 
that the economy would be great during his term in office by borrowing our way into prosperity. 
We borrowed against the future, and soon we will have to pay. 
Are you blaming the current situation on Reaganomics? 
I think Reagan made us feel good as a countr y—and that is wonderful— but, in terms of 
economics, he was the biggest disa ster that ever struck. I thi nk he basically hoodwinked us by 
promising to cut the deficit, and then went on th e biggest spending binge in  the history of this 
country. I don't think a Democrat could have gotte n away with it, becaus e everyone would have 
been very vigilant about  a $150-180 billion deficit. 
Do you see any way in which we can solve our current problems before we go into a deep 
recession, or even depression? 
That is what scares me so much. I don't see any blueprint out of our curr ent dilemma. Maybe there 
are macroeconomic forces at work that are part of a larger super cycle that we don't have any 
control over. Perhaps we are simply responding to the same type of cycles that most advanced 
civilizations fell prey to, whether it was the Ro mans, sixteenth-century Spain, eighteenth-century  68France, or nineteenth-century Britain. I think that we are going to be in for a period of pain. We are 
going to relearn what financ ial discipline is all about. 
Do you use trading systems at all? 
We have tested every system under the sun and, amazingly, we have found one that actually works 
well. It is a very good system, but for obvious reasons, I can't tell you much more about it. 
What type of realm does it fall  into: contrarian? trend following? 
Trend following. The basic premise of the system is that markets move sharply when they move. If 
there is a sudden range expansion in  a market that has been trading narrowly, human nature is to try 
to fade that price move. When you get a range e xpansion, the market is sending you a very loud, 
clear signal that the market is getting ready to  move in the direction of that expansion. 
Are you trading a portion of your funds on that system at the present time? 
We just started trading the system about six months ago, and so far it is doing very well. 
Do you feel a good system can compete with a good trader? 
A good system may be able to trad e more markets effectively than a good trader because it has the 
advantage of unlimited computing power. After all,  every trade decision is  the product of some 
problem-solving process—human or otherwise. Howe ver, because of the complexity in defining 
interacting and changing market patterns, a good trader will us ually be able to outperform a good 
system. 
But a good system can help diversify? 
Unequivocally. A good system will catch ten times as  much of the price move  as I will, during the 
15 percent of the time a market is in a major trending phase. 
The following section of the interview was conducted two weeks later. During the interim, Jones 
had reversed his trading bias on the stock market from bearish to bullish. 
Two weeks ago you were very bearish. What made you change your mind? 
You mean besides the Wall Street Journal article that publicized to th e world that I was short 2,000 
S&P contracts? The market didn't go down. The first thing I do is put  my ear to the railroad tracks. 
I always believe that prices move  first and fundamentals come second. 
Do you mean that if you were right, pri ces should have gone down and the didn't? 
and; they didn't? 
One of the things that Tullis taught me was the im portance of time. When I trade, I don't just use a 
price stop, I also use a time stop. If I think a mark et should break, and it doesn't, I will often get out 
even if I am not losing any money. According to  the 1929 analog model, the market should have 
gone down — it didn't. This was the first time duri ng the past three years that we had a serious 
divergence. I think the strength of the econom y is going to delay the stock market break. 
I believe one reason why we are diverging from the 1 929 model is because of the much easier 
availability of credit today. Vol vo is giving out 120-month car loan s. Think about that! Who owns a 
car for ten years? Twenty years ago, the averag e length of a car loan was twenty-four months; 
today it is fifty-five months. I thi nk the final bottom line will be the same, but the ease of credit will 
delay the process rela tive to the 1920s, when we had a cash economy. 
Some of your preliminary co mments before the start of our interview today make it sound 
like you are paranoid because of your success. 
If the misery in this country ge ts deep enough, the perception is go ing to be that we did well as a 
trading firm, while other people were hurt, because  we had some knowledge. It is not that we had 
any unfair knowledge that other peop le didn't have, it is just that  we did our homework. People just 
don't want to believe that anyone can break away  from the crowd and ri se above mediocrity. 
I understand that, similar to a number of other tr aders I have interviewed, you have trained a 
group of apprentice traders. What was your motivation? 
When I was twenty-one years old, a guy took me unde r his wing and it was th e greatest thing that 
ever happened to me. I felt an obligation to do the same thing for other people.  69How did you find the people you trained? 
Countless interviews. We have been deluged by applicants. 
How many traders have you hired? 
About thirty-five. 
Have they been successful? 
Some have done very well, but overall we have had mixed success. 
Do you believe that is because it takes talent to be a good trader? 
I never thought that before, but I am starting to believe that now. One of my weaknesses is that I 
always tend to be too optimistic, particularly about the ability of ot her people to succeed. 
Was your I Have a Dream Program, in which you have pledged to sponsor the education of a 
group of kids from a poverty sticken area, in spired by the "60 Minutes" show about Eugene 
Lang? 
Right. I went to talk to him the week after the show, and within three months we had set up our 
own program. I have always been a big believer in  leverage. The thing that really turned me on 
about the program was the potential for its multiplic ative impact. By helping one kid, you can have 
an impact on his family and other kids. 
We have also recently set up a new program cal led the Robin Hood Foundation. We are trying to 
seek out and fund people who are on the frontlines in providing f ood and shelter to the poor. We 
are seeking out the people who are used to working with virtually no budget at all, rather than the 
bureaucracies, which often do not deploy the money effectively. 
Has this become a major part of your life? 
I would say so. The markets have been so good to me  that I feel I should give back something in 
return. I can't say that I have been successful be cause I am better than anybody else. By the grace of 
God, I was in the right place at the right time, so I feel a tremendous obligation to share. 
Is the positive intensity of winning as strong as the pain of losing? 
There is nothing worse than a bad trading day. You feel so low that it is difficult to hold your head 
up. But, if I knew that I could also have a simila r experience in the exhilaration of winning, I would 
take the combination of winning a nd losing days any time because you  feel that much more alive. 
Trading gives you an incredibly in tense feeling of what life is all about. Emoti onally, you live on 
the extremes. 
What is the most important advice you could give the average trader? 
Don't focus on making money; focu s on protecting what you have.  
Do you still see yourself trading ten or fifteen years down the road? 
I wouldn't have it any other way. 
 
Paul Jones was a winning trader from his start in the business, but, in the early years, his 
performance was volatile. It took a traumati c trading experience to permanently forge the 
importance of risk control into his mind. Since that gut-wrenching cotton trade in 1979, Jones has 
managed to maintain excellent net profita bility, while bringi ng his risk way down. 
Today, risk control is the essence of Jones' trading style and suc cess. He never thinks about what he 
might make on a given trade, but only on what he  could lose. He mentally marks each of his 
positions to the market. No matter how large a prof it he may have in a position, in Jones' mind his 
entry price was the previous night' s close. Since this approach assu res that there is never a cushion 
in his trades, Jones never gets complacent about a ny of his positions. He not only watches the risk 
of each position, but he closely monito rs the performance of his entire portfolio in real-time. If his 
total equity drops 1 to 2 percen t during a single trading session, he might well liquidate all of his 
positions instantaneously to cut his risk. "It is always  easier to get back in than to get out," he says. 
If Jones' trading starts going poorly, he will conti nually reduce his position size until he is on track 
again. That way, when he is trading his worst, he is also  trading his smallest. In any month with net 
trading losses, Jones will automatically reduce his risk exposure to make sure he never registers a  70double-digit loss in a single month. After big winning streaks, he is partic ularly cautious about 
getting overconfident. 
In short, Jones maintains risk control in a dozen di fferent ways. As he puts it, "The most important 
rule in trading is: Play great  defense, not great offense." 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  71Gary Bielfeldt-Yes, They Do Trade T-Bonds in Peoria 
For years, I have heard the name BLH mentione d as one of the major players in the futures 
markets, particularly T-bonds, the world's larg est futures market. I assumed BLH was a huge 
trading corporation, but in seeking out the country's  best traders, I discovered that BLH was basi-
cally a single indivi dual: Gary Bielfeldt. 
Who is Gary Bielfeldt? Where did he get the capital to rival the primary Wall Street institutions as 
a major force in the T-bond futures market? Bielfe ldt began his trading car eer twenty-five years 
ago, with a mere $1,000 investment. At first, his capital was so limited he confined himself to 
trading a single corn contract—one of the smallest futures contracts at a time  of relative stagnation 
in agricultural prices. From this extremely modest start, Bielfeld t eventually built his account up to 
staggering proportions. 
How did he do it? Bielfeldt does not believe in di versification. His trading philosophy is that you 
pick one area and become expert at it. For much of his trading career, the soybean complex and, to 
a more minor extent, the related grain market s provided that focal point of attention. 
Although Bielfeldt had the desire to become a fu ll-time trader from the beginning, his tiny capital 
base restricted his trading to a part-time endeavor . In those early years, he  earned his living running 
a small brokerage office. The problem he faced was how he, a trader without any independent 
funds, could develop a sufficient capital base to become a profe ssional trader. Bielfeldt's strong 
desire to make this leap in hi s capital base prompted him to take  a large, if not imprudent, risk. 
By 1965, Bielfeldt had painstakingly built up his initial $1,000 stake to $10,000. Based on his 
fundamental evaluation of the soybean market, as well as the concurri ng opinion by his former 
agricultural economics professor, Thomas Hieronymus, Bielfeldt st rongly believed that prices 
would go higher. In an all-or-nothi ng play, he bought twen ty soybean contracts,  an extremely high-
leverage position given his $10,000 account size. A mere 10-cent price decline would have com-
pletely wiped out his account , while a considerably smaller dec line would have been sufficient to 
generate a forced-liquidation margin call. Initia lly, prices did move lower, and Bielfeldt came 
perilously close to that damaging margin call. But he  held on, and prices eventually reversed to the 
upside. By the time he liquidated the position, he had more than doubled his equity on that single 
trade. That trade launch ed Bielfeldt toward his much sought  after goal of becoming a full-time 
trader. 
Bielfeldt built his account with unerring consistency. By the early 1980s, Bielfeldt's trading size 
had grown to the point that government-established speculative position limits in the soybean and 
grain markets were becoming an impediment. This factor, aided by a particularly bad trade in the 
soybean market in 1983, prompted Bielfeldt to sh ift his focus to the T-bond futures market, which 
at the time had no position limit. (Although a positio n limit was eventually implemented in the T-
bond market, the 10,000 contract limit dwarfe d the 600-contract limit in soybeans.) 
The 1983 soybean loss may have been the best thing th at ever happened to Bi elfeldt. His shift to T-
bonds coincided with an evolving major bottom in that market. He became very bullish and built up 
a huge long T-bond position at the right time. Wh en the T-bond market exploded during the mid-
1984 to early 1986 period, Bielfeldt was perfectly posi tioned to garner huge pr ofits. His ability to 
stay with a major position for a lo ng-term move allowed him to leverage his well-timed trade to a 
much greater degree than would have been achie ved by most professional traders with the same 
initial position. This long T-bond position was Bielfe ldt's best trade ever and catapulted him into a 
new echelon. That, in short, is the story of how a one-lot corn trader became a T-bond futures 
trader in the same league as the most prominent institutional market participants. 
Bielfeldt could not be further removed from the popul ar image of a large-scal e trader in the highly 
leveraged sphere of futures trad ing. One would hardly expect to find one of the world's largest bond 
traders in Peoria. Bielfeldt's attach ment to his home town is so st rong that he refused to consider 
becoming a trader on the floor of the Chicago Bo ard of Trade because it would have meant giving 
up his cherished lifestyle. He is the epitome of the small town model American citizen: honest, hard 
working, devoted to family and community. One of Bi elfeldt's major goals has been to plow back a 
portion of his trading-deri ved wealth into projects  benefiting his home town. 
I interviewed Bielfeldt in his large, comfor tably furnished office. The huge, wraparound desk  72configuration was flanked by ten quot e screens. Despite this vast ar ray of electronics, Bielfeldt was 
low keyed. He rarely glanced at th e screens during the afte rnoon I spent in his offi ce, and it is hard 
to visualize him trading frantica lly at any time, the vast array of quote machines notwithstanding. 
Bielfeldt is a soft-spoken man of few words. He is also a very modest man who consistently 
hesitated talking about his achieve ments, lest it sound like bragging. His very conservative nature 
led him to avoid even seemingly innocuous subjects. For example, at one point in discussing the 
reasons for his net trading losses in a given year, he  asked me to turn off my tape recorder. I could 
hardly imagine what he might say that necessitate d this precautionary measure. The off-the-record 
comments proved far from shocking. It turned out that his trading losses  in that year were 
influenced by an overextension into other commi tments, including his membership on the Chicago 
Board of Trade Board of Directors, a position wh ich required frequent travel to Chicago. Ap-
parently, he was reluctant to be quoted because he did not want to make it seem that he was 
blaming his other responsibilities—w hich he deemed part of his na tural obligations—for his trading 
losses. 
The combination of Bielfeldt's laconic nature, mode sty, and conservatism made  this a very difficult 
interview. In fact, this was the only intervie w I conducted in which the average length of the 
questions was longer than the average length of th e responses. I considered deleting the interview 
from the book—a tempting choice since I had an ex cess of material. However, I found Bielfeldt's 
story so compelling and his characte r so strong that I was reluctant to take the easy way out. As a 
compromise, I weighted this chapter to the narrat ive side and limited the interview section to a few 
excerpts. 
What is your basic approach in analyzing and trading the markets? 
I always try to lean primarily on fundamental an alysis. However, since I found it was very difficult 
to know all the fundamentals—usually you are doi ng pretty well if you ha ve 80 percent of the 
pieces—I thought it was important to have someth ing to fall back on in case my fundamental 
analysis was wrong. 
I assume you are referring to technical analysis as a supplement. 
Right. I developed my own trend-following system.  
Do you trade this system in any consistent way? 
I use the system primarily as a backup to  tell me when to get out of a position. 
Can you think of an example? 
At the start of 1988,1 was long the bond market primarily because I was expecting a weaker 
economy. Everything seemed to be on target un til early March when the bond market started 
edging down. At some point, you have to say you ar e wrong. In this case, my system provided me 
with the rationale for getti ng out of my losing position. 
What went wrong with that trade? 
Basically, the economy was a lot stronger than I ha d anticipated. I thought that there would be a 
bigger fear factor left over fr om the October 1987 stock market crash than actually materialized. 
What is your opinion of trend-following systems? 
The best thing anyone can do when starting out is to learn how a trend system works. Trading a 
trend system for a while will teach a new trader th e principle of letting profits run and cutting losses 
short. If you can just learn di scipline by using a trend-following system, even temporarily, it will 
increase your odds of being successful as a trader. 
Do you have an opinion about systems sold to the public? 
I looked at some of these systems a few years a go and found that they generally made too many 
trades. If a system trades too fr equently, the transaction costs will  be too high, a factor that will 
significantly reduce the probability of  the system working. I think to be viable, a trend-following 
system has to be medium to longer term. The more sensitive systems just generate too much 
commission. 
Besides providing a training vehicle for learning  good trading habits, do you feel that trend- 73following systems can provide an effective trading approach? 
I would advise anyone who develops  a system to combine it with  their own judgment. In other 
words, they should trade half the money on a syst em and the other half using their own judgment, 
just in case the system isn't working. 
Is that the way you trade? 
I used to pay more attention to  systems than I do now. Basically, I just focus on my own judgment. 
Is that because your own judgment is more relia ble, or because systems haven't been working 
as well as they used to? 
They haven't worked as well as they used to  because there are too many people using them. 
Whenever too many people are doing the same th ing, the market will go through a period of 
adjustment. 
What are the key factors you focus on in f undamentally evaluating the T-bond market? 
The economy is definitely the single most impor tant factor. Four other important elements are 
inflation expectations, the dollar, the trade balance, and the budget deficit. 
You have been trading for over twenty-five ye ars—a much longer time period than most 
other traders. Is there any single trade that stands out as the most dramatic? 
There are quite a few trades that  would qualify as dramatic, but the one that stands out most 
prominently was my attempt to pick the bottom of the bond market in 1983 and 1984. 
When did you start trying to buy the bonds? 
I started trying to pick a bottom when th e bonds were trading in the 63-66 area. 
How much risk did you allow when putting on a trade? 
Generally anywhere from \ to ГА points. [One point in T-bond future s is equal to 32 ticks. A 1-point 
move is equal to $1,000 per contract.] 
So if you tried to pick a spot  that looked good and it didn't  work, you would bail out and try 
again at another spot? 
Right. 
Since bonds eventually declined into the 50s, I guess you must have had a few strikes against 
you before you finally went long in the right place. 
Yes, there were several lo sses over a period of time. 
Do you remember when you finally got positioned  at a point where you didn't have to get 
out? 
I turned really bullish in May 1984, when they au ctioned off five-year notes at a 13.93 yield. I had 
been involved in banking since 1974, and at the time, we couldn't find any qualified borrowers for 
three-year loans at 13 percent. Ye t here were government five-year notes selling at nearly a full 
percentage point above that level. Moreover, this was at a time when we were at the height of a 
recession in Peoria: Unemployment was approachi ng 20 percent and the farm crisis was worsening. 
I felt that interest rates had probably gone high enough. From that point on through April 1986,1 
traded T-bonds heavily from the long side. There is no question that that was my best trade and 
longest trend ever. 
What are the elements of good trading? 
The most important thing is to have a method for staying with your winners and getting rid of your 
losers. 
What do you do to make  sure that you stay with a winning position to exploit the longer-term 
trend? How do you avoid the temptati on of taking profits prematurely? 
The best way I know to learn discipline and pati ence is to think through a trade thoroughly before 
putting it on. You need to develop a plan of your st rategies for various con tingencies. That way, 
you won't get swayed by every news item that hits the market and causes pr ices to move up or 
down. Also, it helps greatly to have a long-term objective that you have derived by really doing 
your homework. You combine that long-term objective with a protective stop th at you move as the  74position goes your way. Alternatively, you could use a trend-following system to signal when you 
should get out of the trade. By having thought out  your objective and having a strategy for getting 
out in case the market trend changes, you greatly in crease the potential for staying in your winning 
positions. 
Why do most traders lose? 
They overtrade, which means that they have to  be right a lot just to cover commissions. 
What are the traits of a successful trader? 
The most important is disciplin e—I am sure everyone tells you that. Second, you have to have 
patience; if you have a good trade on, you have to be  able to stay with it.  Third, you need courage 
to go into the market, and courage comes from adequate capitalization. Fourth, you must have a 
willingness to lose; that is also related to adequate capitalization. Fifth, you need a strong desire to 
win. 
Those elements seem fairly straightforward,  except for the willingness to lose. Can you 
expound on that? 
You should have the attitude that if a trade lo ses, you can handle it without any problem and come 
back to do the next trade. You can't le t a losing trade get to you emotionally. 
Can you talk more about what you mean by courage? 
If a 260-pound fullback is running through the line and a 175-pound linebacker has to stop him, he 
has to have the courage to go into him. You need th at kind of courage to be able to participate in 
the markets. If everyone is bullish  the dollar, and the yen is sharpl y lower, it takes courage to fade 
that major consensus and buy the yen. 
How do you judge success? 
Most people will judge success by how well they do in their field. A teacher would judge success 
by how well the students do and how they go thr ough life. A trader would probably judge success 
by whether he wins or loses in the market. 
Speaking personally, how do you judge success'. 
I judge success by what I do with the money I accumu late. One of the things that my wife and I 
have done is to establish a foundation so that we could share some of our success with the 
community by supporting various programs. 
Is this foundation one that you just fund, or do you have a hands-on relationship in running 
it? 
My family and I are directly involved in evalua ting different projects and deciding which ones to 
fund. 
When did you set up this foundation? 
In 1985. But I had thought about the idea as far back as the early 1970s. I had always planned that 
if I were to become successful, I would set up a foundation to help the community. 
Do you think this long-term goal was an impo rtant motivation leading to your success as a 
trader? 
Yes, I think it helped. 
What advice do you have for the beginning trader? 
When you are starting out, it is very important not to get too far behind becau se it is very difficult 
to fight back. Most traders have a tendency to take risk s that are too large at  the beginning. They 
tend not to be selective enough a bout when they take risks. 
At this point, Bielfeldt asked me to turn off the tape recorder. He talked about the relevance and 
application of poker strategy to trading. His reason for keeping th e comments off-the-record was 
that he didn't want to contribute to the image of  trading as a form of gambling. I found his analogy 
particularly apropos and finally pe rsuaded him to put it on the record. 
Could you explain your analogy between trading and poker? 
I learned how to play poker at a very young age. My fa ther taught me the c oncept of playing the  75percentage hands. You don't just play every ha nd and stay through every card, because if you do, 
you will have a much higher probability of losing. You should play the good hands, and drop out of 
the poor hands, forfeiting the ante. When more of  the cards are on the table and you have a very 
strong hand—in other words, when you feel the percentages are skewed in your favor—you raise 
and play that hand to the hilt. 
If you apply the same principles of poker strate gy to trading, it increa ses your odds of winning 
significantly. I have always tried to keep the c oncept of patience in mind by waiting for the right 
trade, just like you wait for the pe rcentage hand in poker. If a tr ade doesn't look right, you get out 
and take a small loss; it's precisely equivalent to  forfeiting the ante by dropping out of a poor hand 
in poker. On the other hand, when the percentages seem to be strongly in  your favor, you should be 
aggressive and really try to leverage the trad e similar to the way you raise on the good hands in 
poker. 
Bielfeldt's story provides an inspiring example of what is attainable give n patience on the one hand 
and an aggressive trading style on the other. Here  is an individual who, starting with a minuscule 
amount of money, working independently, and without  benefit of staff or elaborate technology, 
became one of the world's most successful traders.  Moreover, because of his long-term goals and 
actions, his ultimate success positivel y impacted an entire community. 
The portion of Gary Bielfeldt' s interview that I f ound most insightful was his analogy between 
poker and trading. It is also interesting to comp are Bielfeldt's key point in this analogy to the 
similar advice offered by James Rogers: Have the pa tience to wait for the ri ght trade to come along. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  76Ed Seykota-Everybody Gets What They Want 
Although completely unknown, not only to the public, but to most of the fi nancial community as 
well, Ed Seykota's achievements must certainly rank hi m as one of the best traders of our time. In 
the early 1970s, Seykota was hired by a major broke rage firm. He conceived and developed the 
first commercial computerized trading system for managing clients' money in the futures markets. 
His system proved quite profitable, but in terference and second-gue ssing by management 
significantly impeded its performance. This experi ence provided the catalyst for Seykota going out 
on his own. 
In the ensuing years, Seykota app lied his systematized approach to  trading a handful of accounts 
and his own money. During that period, the accounts Seykota managed have witnessed an 
absolutely astounding rate of return. For example,  as of mid-1988, one of his customer accounts, 
which started with $5,000 in 1972, was up ove r 250,000 percent on a cash-on-cash basis. 
(Normalized for withdrawals, the account theore tically was up several million percent.) I know of 
no other trader who has matc hed this track record over the same length of time. 
I had never heard of Seykota wh en I first began working on this  book. Seykota's name had come up 
several times during my interview of Michael Marc us as the person who was most influential in 
transforming him into a successful trader. Afte r our interview, Marcus  said reflectively, "You 
know, you really should interview Ed Seykota. He is not only a great trader; he is a mind." 
Marcus provided an introduction over the phone, a nd I briefly outlined the concept of my book to 
Seykota. Since I was already out We st, it was most convenient for me to interview Seykota on the 
same trip by rerouting my return to New York via Reno. Seykota was agreea ble to participating, 
but seemed skeptical of my ability to complete th e inter-vie w in the space of two hours (the time 
available in order for me to make my flight c onnections). I assured him that, although it was tight, I 
had done a few other interviews in that space of time. "It is feasible as long as our conversation 
remains very focused," I explained. 
I cut my arrival at the airport extremely close, ha ving forgotten to revise my ticket to reflect the 
change in itinerary. After a voci ferous argument with a ticket ag ent who insisted I didn't have 
enough time to catch my flight—a contention she n early made self-fulfilling—I raced through the 
airport, reaching the gate with only seconds to spare. By the time I arrived in Reno, the tension 
from my near-missed flight had just about dissip ated. The drive to Seykota's house was too far for a 
cab, so I rented a car. It was very early morning, and the high way winding up into the mountains 
offered spectacular vistas below. The classica l music station I found on the radio was playing 
Mozart's Clarinet Concerto. The combination was glorious. 
Seykota works from an office in his house, wh ich borders Lake Tahoe. Before beginning the 
interview, we took a brief walk out onto the beac h behind his house. It was a cold, clear morning, 
and the view was idyllic. The contrast between  his workplace and my own—an office in the Wall 
Street area, with a prominent vi ew of an ugly building—could hard ly have been more striking. I 
plead guilty to jealousy. 
In contrast to virtually all the other traders I had interviewed, Seykot a's desk is not flanked by an 
array of quote screens, or, for th at matter, even a single screen. Hi s trading is largely confined to 
the few minutes it takes to run his computer program which gene rates signals for the next day. 
In my conversation with Seykot a, I was struck by the intensity of both his intelligence and 
sensitivity—an odd combination I thought. He has a way of looking at things from a unique 
vantage point. At one moment, he could be talki ng about analytical techni ques and would appear as 
the consummate scientist (he holds a degree in electrical engineering fr om MIT), bringing up a 
three-dimensional diagram on the computer scr een, generated by one of the many programs he had 
designed. Yet, in another moment, when the conversation turned to the psychology of trading, he 
would reveal great sensitivity a nd insight into human behavior. 
Indeed, in recent years, Seykota has become very involved in the field of psychology. It appeared 
to me that psychology, and its application in help ing people solve their problems, had become a 
more important element in his lif e than market analysis and trad ing. I suspect that Seykota would 
probably find this contrast somewhat artificial, in  that to him, trading and psychology are one and 
the same thing.  77Our conversation was not as focused as I had inte nded it to be. In fact, it went off in so many 
directions that we had barely scratched th e surface by the time the two hours had elapsed. I 
continued on, assuming that I would merely catch a la ter flight. As it turned out , the flight that I had 
missed was the last direct one from Reno to New York. 
Seykota later told me that  he knew in our first phone conversatio n that I would end up spending the 
day. He is extremely perceptive about people. Fo r example, at one point in our conversation, 
Seykota asked me, "How many minutes fast do  you set your watch?" I found this question 
particularly striking in that in our brief time toge ther, he had been able to pick up on one of my 
basic character traits. The question was also partic ularly timely, given my ne ar-missed flight earlier 
that morning. 
Seykota's success goes well beyond his trading. He  impressed me as someone who had found 
meaning in his life, and was living exactly  the life he want ed to be living. 
How did you first get involved in trading? 
In the late 1960s, I decided that silver had to rise when the U. S. Treasury stopped selling it. I 
opened a commodity margin account to take full a dvantage of my insight. While I was waiting, my 
broker convinced me to short some copper. I s oon got stopped out and lost some money and my 
trading virginity. So I went back to waiting for the start of the big, inevitable bull market in silver. 
Finally, the day arrived. I bought. Much to my amazeme nt and financial detriment, the price started 
falling! 
At first it seemed impossible to me that silver could fall on such a bullish deal. Yet the price was 
falling and that was a fact. Soon my stop got hit. This was a very stunning education about the way 
markets discount news. I became more and more fascinated with how markets work. 
About that time, I saw a letter published by Richard Donchian, which implied that a purely 
mechanical trend-following system could beat the markets. This too seemed impossible to me. So I 
wrote computer programs (on punch cards in t hose days) to test the theories. Amazingly, his 
theories tested true. To this day, I'm not sure  I understand why or whether I really need to. 
Anyhow, studying the markets, and backing up my  opinions with money, was so fascinating 
compared to my other career oppo rtunities at the time, that I be gan trading full time for a living. 
What was your first trading-related job? 
I landed my first job on Wall Street in the early 1 970s as an analyst with a major brokerage house. I 
was assigned to cover the egg and broiler markets. [Broilers are young ch ickens up to 2'<i pounds 
dressed weight. The futures markets for both broile rs and eggs have since disappeared as waning 
trading activity prompted their delisting by the pa rent exchanges.] I found it interesting that an 
entry level guy like me was immediately placed in charge of dispensing tr ading advice. I once 
wrote an article recommending that traders stay away from the market for a while. Management 
censored that comment from the ma rket letter— likely because it didn't promise to motivate much 
trading. 
I wanted to start applying computers to the bus iness of analysis. Remember, in those days 
computers were still typically punch card devi ces used for accounting. The guy who was running 
the computer department seemed to see me as a thr eat to his job security, a nd he repeatedly chased 
me off his turf. After about a m onth at that job, I announced that I was going to quit. The head of 
the department called me in to fi nd out why. It was the first time he  had ever been interested in 
talking to me. 
I went to work for another brokerage house, wh ich was going through a re organization. There was 
a lot less management, so I took advantage of the lack of supervision by using the accounting 
computer to test trading systems during the w eekends. They had an IBM 360 which took up a large 
air conditioned room. Over the cour se of about a half year, I wa s able to test  about a hundred 
variations of four simple systems for about ten years of data on ten commodities. Today, the same 
job takes about one day on a PC. A nyway, I got my results. They co nfirmed there was a possibility 
of making money from trend-following systems. 
I take it that computer testing of systems wa s not part of your job,  since you did it on 
weekends. What were you actually hired to do? 
During the week, my normal Clark Kent type job wa s to load new rolls of paper onto the Reuters  78machine when the margin turned pink. I was also re sponsible for tearing off the news in strips and 
hanging them up on the wall behind the machine. The trick was to tear between line-feeds so as to 
get a smooth edge. The funny thing was that hardly anyone would read the news since they'd have 
to lean way over the machine to see the pages. So I started reading the news and personally 
delivering it to the brokers. One bonus of this job wa s that I got to observe a lot of brokers' trading 
styles. 
Your official position sounds like a glorified office boy. Why did you accept such a menial 
job? 
Because I knew I wanted to be in the business, and I didn't care what I did, or what I got paid. 
Why didn't you stay at your original positi on? At least there you were an analyst. 
Because it was a stultifying environment. I di sapproved of management pressures to recommend 
trades when I thought there were no trading opport unities. Also, I saw that being allowed access to 
the company computers for testing trading sy stems (my real desire) was a dead issue. 
Did you know that you could have a ccess to the computer at your new job? 
No, but since the company had just gone through a major shake-up and most of the management 
had been fired, I figured there woul dn't be very much of a bureaucr acy to interfere with my use of 
the computer. 
What became of your work on computerized trading systems? 
Eventually, management got interested in us ing my research results  for managing money. I 
developed the first large-scale comme rcial computerized trading system. 
What do you mean by large scale? 
The program was marketed by se veral hundred agents  of the firm, and the equity under 
management was several million dollars—a large amount of money in the early 1970s. 
How did you get management to support you to that extent? 
They were familiar with Richard Donchian, w ho was a pioneer in deve loping trend-following 
trading systems, although, at the time, he was do ing everything by hand. Because of that exposure, 
they were already favorably disposed to the con cept of using trading syst ems to manage money. 
Also, at the time, computers were so new that "computer system" was a great buzzword. 
How did your trading program do? 
The program did fine; the problem  was that management couldn't keep from second-guessing the 
signals. For example, I remember one time the program generated a buy signal for sugar when it 
was trading around 5 cents. Mana gement thought that the mark et was already overbought and 
decided not to take the signal. When the market kept on going higher, they  came up with the rule 
that they would buy on the first 20- point pullback [ 100 points equal 1 cent]. When no such 
pullback developed, they modified the rule  to buying on the firs t 30-point reaction. 
As the market kept moving higher without any mean ingful retracements, they  changed th e rule to 
50 points and eventually 100 points.  Finally, with sugar prices ar ound 9 cents, they finally decided 
that it was a bull market, and that they had better buy before prices went much higher. They put the 
managed accounts long at that point. As you might guess, the sugar market peaked shortly 
thereafter. They compounded the error by ignoring the sell signal as well—a signal which also 
would have been very profitable. 
The bottom line was that because of this interference, the most profita ble trade of the year ended up 
losing money. As a result, instead of a theoretical return of 60 percent for the year, quite a few 
accounts actually lost money. This type of meddling was one of the main reasons w hy I eventually 
quit. 
What were the other reasons? 
Management wanted me to change the system so that it would trade more actively, thereby 
generating more commission income. I explained to th em that it would be very easy to make such a 
change, but doing so would seriously impede performance. They didn't seem to care. 
What did you do after you quit?  79I just quit the research department, but I stayed  on as a broker managing accounts. After about two 
years, I gave up brokerage to become a money mana ger. That shift allowed me to get away from 
earning my living from commissions, which I think can be a counterproductive incentive to making 
money for clients. I switched to a pure profit incentiv e fee arrangement. 
Did you continue trading the system after you left? 
Yes, although I substantially revise d the system over the years.  
What is the performance track record? 
I do not publicize my track record  other than my "model account," which is an actual customer 
account that started with $5,000 in 1972 and has ma de over $15 million. Theoretically, the total 
return would have been many multiples larger had there been no withdrawals. 
With performance like that, how come you haven't been deluged with word-of-mouth 
requests to manage money? 
I do receive requests, but I very rarely accept new accounts. If I do, it is only after considerable 
interviewing and screening to de termine the motivations and attit udes of the client. I have found 
that the people I associate with have subtle, yet very important, effects on my performance. If, for 
example, they are able to support me and my met hods over the long term, then they tend to help 
me. If, however, they get too concerned with th e short-term ups and downs of their account, they 
can be a hindrance. 
How many accounts did you originally start out with? 
About a half dozen back in the early 1970s.  
How many of those accounts are still with you? 
Four. One client made about $15 million and d ecided to withdraw his money and manage it 
himself; another made over $10 million and de cided to buy a house on the beach and retire. 
What source did you learn from before designing your first system? 
I was inspired and influenced by the book Reminiscences of a Stock Operator and also by Richard 
Donchian's five- and twenty-day moving average cr ossover system and his weekly rule system. I 
consider Donchian to be one of th e guiding lights of technical trading. 
What was your first trading system? 
My first system was a variation of Donchian's  moving average system. I used an exponential 
averaging method because it was easier to calculat e and computational errors tended to disappear 
over time. It was so new at the time that it was being passed around by word of mouth as the 
"expedential system." 
Your reference to a first system  implies that you eventually changed systems. How did you 
know when your system n eeded to be changed? 
Systems don't need to be changed. The trick is for a trader to develop a system with which he is 
compatible. 
Were you incompatible with your original system? 
My original system was very simple with hard-and- fast rules that didn't a llow for any deviations. I 
found it difficult to stay with the system while di sregarding my own feelings. I kept jumping on and 
off—often at just the wrong time. I thought I knew  better than the system. At the time, I didn't 
really trust that trend-following systems would work. There is plen ty of literature "proving" they 
don't. Also, it seemed a waste of my intellect and MIT education to  just sit there and not try to 
figure out the markets. Eventuall y, as I became more confident of trading with the trend, and more 
able to ignore the news, I became more comfortable with the approach. Also, as I continued to 
incorporate more "expert trader rules," my system  became more compatible with my trading style. 
What is your trading style? 
My style is basically trend following, with some special pattern recognition and money 
management algorithms. 
Without divulging trade secrets, how have you been able to so spectacularly outperform  80standard trend-following systems? 
The key to long-term survival and prosperity  has a lot to do with the money management 
techniques incorporated into the technical system . There are old traders a nd there are bold traders, 
but there are very few old, bold traders. 
Witty and true, but the question remains, albeit  in translated form: There are many trend-
following systems with money management ru les; why have you done so much better? 
I seem to have a gift. I think it is related to my  overall philosophy, which has a lot to do with loving 
the markets and maintaining an optimistic attitude. Also, as I keep trading and learning, my system 
(that is the mechanical computer version of what  I do) keeps evolving. I would add that I consider 
myself and how I do things as a kind of system which, by definiti on, I always follow. Sometimes I 
trade entirely off the m echanical part, sometimes I override the signals based on strong feelings, 
and sometimes I just quit altogether. The immedi ate trading result of this jumping around is 
probably breakeven to somewhat negative. Howeve r, if I didn't allow myself the freedom to 
discharge my creative side, it might build up to so me kind of blowout. Striking a workable ecology 
seems to promote trading longevit y, which is one key to success. 
How would you compare the relative ad vantages and disadvantages of systems trading versus 
discretionary trading?  
Systems trading is ultimately discretionary. The manager still has to deci de how much risk to 
accept, which markets to play, and how aggressively to increase and decrease the trading base as a 
function of equity change. Thes e decisions are quite important—of ten more important than trade 
timing. 
What percentage of your trading is systems ba sed? Has this percentage changed over time? 
Over time, I have become more mechanical, since (1)1 have become more trusting of trend trading, 
and (2) my mechanical programs have factored in more and more "tricks of the trade." I still go 
through periods of thinking I can outperform my ow n system, but such excursions are often self-
correcting through the pr ocess of losing money. 
What are the present and future prospects for trend-following systems? Do you think the 
growing prevalence of their use will doom them to eventual failure? 
No. All trading is done on some so rt of system, whether or not it is conscious. Many of the good 
systems are based on following trends. Life itself is based on trends. Birds start south for the winter 
and keep on going. Companies track trends and a lter their products acco rdingly. Tiny protozoa 
move in trends along chemical and luminescence gradients. 
The profitability of trading systems seems to move  in cycles. Periods during which trend-following 
systems are highly successful will le ad to their increased popularity. As the number of system users 
increases, and the markets shift from trending to  directionless price acti on, these systems become 
unprofitable, and undercapitalized a nd inexperienced traders will get shaken out. Longevity is the 
key to success. 
What are your thoughts about using fundame ntal analysis as an input in trading? 
Fundamentals that you read about are typically useless as the market has already discounted the 
price, and I call them "funny-mentals." However, if  you catch on early, before others believe, then 
you might have valuable "surprise-a-mentals." 
Your answer is a bit facetious. Does it imply that you only use technical analysis? 
I am primarily a trend trader with touches of hunc hes based on about twenty years of experience. In 
order of importance to me are: (1 ) the long-term trend, (2 ) the current chart pa ttern, and (3) picking 
a good spot to buy or sell. Thos e are the three primary component s of my trading. Way down in 
very distant fourth place are my fundamental ideas and, quite likely, on balance, they have cost me 
money. 
By picking the right spot to buy, do you mean determining a reaction point at which you will 
buy? If so, how do you avoid someti mes missing majo r price moves? 
Oh no. If I were buying, my point would be above th e market. I try to identify a point at which I 
expect the market momentum to be  strong in the direction of the tr ade, so as to reduce my probable  81risk. I don't try to pick a bottom or top. 
Does that imply that if you are bullish, you will always wait for short-term strength before 
entering a position, or will you sometimes buy on a reaction? 
If I am bullish, I neither buy on a reaction, nor wait fo r strength; I am already in. I turn bullish at 
the instant my buy stop is hit, and stay bullish un til my sell stop is hit. Being bullish and not being 
long is illogical. 
Do you ever use contrary opinion as an aid to your trading? 
Sometimes. For example, at a recent goldbug conferen ce, virtually all the speakers were bearish. I 
said to myself, "Gold is probably near a botto m." [The market did indeed rally after that 
conference.] 
Would you buy because of that type of input? 
Oh no, the trend was still down. But it might get me to lighten up my short position. 
What was your most dramatic or  emotional trading experience? 
Dramatic and emotional trading experiences tend to be  negative. Pride is a great banana peel, as are 
hope, fear, and greed. My biggest slip-ups occurred shortly after I got emotionally involved with 
positions. 
How about some actual "war stories"? 
I prefer not to dwell on past situa tions. I tend to cut bad trades as soon as possible, forget them, and 
then move on to new opportunities.  After I bury a dead trade, I don't like to dig up the details 
again—at least not in print. Maybe some evening, after dinner, sitting around a fire, off the record, 
deep in the Tahoe winter... 
Can you describe specific trading mistakes that you learned from? 
I had a "thing" for silver for years. One of my firs t losses was in silver, as were many of my worst 
losses. It seemed to get into my blood and hypnotize me. It inveigled me to pull my protective stops 
so as to avoid getting bear-rai ded. Naturally, it would hold moment arily and then collapse some 
more. I got killed so many times by silver spikes  that I started thinking I was some kind of 
werewolf. I worked on myself with  hypnosis and positive imagery. I al so avoided walks in the full 
moon. So far it seems to be working. 
How do you pick your trades? 
Mostly by my trading system, although occasionally, I will get an impulsive flash and override my 
system. Fortunately, I don't usually take on a big enough position to do any lasting damage to my 
portfolio. 
What are the elements of good trading? 
The elements of good trading are: (1) cutting losses, (2) cutting losses, and (3 ) cutting losses. If you 
can follow these three rules, you may have a chance. 
How do you handle a losing streak? 
I handle losing streaks by tr imming down my activity. I just wait it out. Trying to  trade during a 
losing streak is emotionally devastating. Trying to play "catch up" is lethal. 
Since you are primarily a systems trader, woul dn't following a system imply no changes of 
trading activity during losing periods? 
I have incorporated some logic in to my computer programs, such as  modulating the trading activity 
depending on market behavior. Still, important deci sions need to be made outside the mechanical 
system boundaries , such as how to maintain diversification for a growing account when some 
positions are at position limit or when markets are too thin. 
Psychologically, I tend to alter my activity dependi ng on performance. I tend to be more aggressive 
after I have been winning, and less so after losses. These tendencies seem OK. In contrast, a costly 
tendency is to get emotional over a loss and then try to get even with an  overly large position. 
Are you a self-taught trader, or did anot her trader teach you worthwhile lessons? 
I am a self-taught trader who is continua lly studying both myself and other traders.  82Do you decide where you are getting ou t before you get in on a trade? 
I set protective stops at the same time I enter a tr ade. I normally move these stops in to lock in a 
profit as the trend continues. Sometimes, I take profits when a market gets wild. This usually 
doesn't get me out any better than waiting for my  stops to close in, but it does cut down on the 
volatility of the por tfolio, which helps calm my nerves. Losi ng a position is a ggravating, whereas 
losing your nerve is devastating. 
What is the maximum percentage of equity  you will risk on any individual trade? 
I intend to risk below 5 percent on a trade, allo wing for poor executions. Occasionally I have taken 
losses above that amount when major news caused a thin market to jump through my stops. 
What was your single worst "thin market" loss? 
All markets are too thin when I wa nt to get out of a ba d position in a hurry. Mo st markets have, on 
occasion, moved rapidly against me due to surpri se news. As soon as the news is digested, the 
market thickens up again at a new level. During the big sugar bull market when prices moved from 
10 cents to 40 cents, I was carrying thousa nds of contracts and I gave up several cents getting out of 
my position. [Each cent in sugar is equivalent to $1,120 per contract.] 
Very few traders have enjoyed the spectacular  success you have. What makes you different? 
I feel my success comes from my love of the markets.  I am not a casual trader. It is my life. I have a 
passion for trading. It is not me rely a hobby or even a career choice for me. There is no question 
that this is what I am supposed to do with my life. 
What are the trading rules you live by? 
a. Cut losses. 
b. Ride winners. 
c. Keep bets small. 
d. Follow the rules without question. 
e. Know when to break the rules. 
Your last two rules are cute because they ar e contradictory. Seriously now, which do you 
believe: Follow the rules, or know when to break the rules? 
I believe both. Mostly I follow the rales. As I keep studying the markets, I sometimes find a new 
rale which breaks and then replaces a previous ra le. Sometimes I get to a personal breakpoint. 
When that happens, I just get out of the markets a ltogether and take a vacati on until I feel that I am 
ready to follow the rales again. Perhaps some day, I will have a more explicit rale for breaking 
rales. 
I don't think traders can follow rales for very l ong unless they reflect th eir own trading style. 
Eventually, a breaking point is r eached and the trader has to quit or change, or find a new set of 
rales he can follow. This seems to be part of the process of evolution and growth of a trader. 
How important to trading success is varying the size of the bet? 
It might be a good idea depending on the reas on for doing so. Consider, though, if you had a 
successful modification policy, say "M" for changing system "S," then you might be better off just 
trading "M." 
How important is gut feel? 
Gut feel is important. If ignored, it may come out in subtle ways by coloring your logic. It can be 
dealt with through meditation and re flection to determine what's behi nd it. If it pers ists, then it 
might be a valuable subconscious analysis of some subtle information. Otherwise, it might be a 
dangerous sublimation of an inner desire for ex citement and! not reflect market conditions. Be 
sensitive to the subtle differences be tween "intuition" and "into wishing." 
What was your worst year? What went wrong? 
One of my worst years was 1980. The bull markets ha d ended, but I kept tryi ng to hold on and buy 
back in at lower prices. The markets just kept on  breaking. I had never s een a major bear market 
before, so I was all set up for an  important educational experience. 
What happened to the money management ru les in your system in 1980? Did you override  83them? 
I continued to trade even though my system was la rgely out of the markets due to the enormous 
volatility. I tried to pick tops and bottom is in  what I considered grossly overbought and oversold 
markets. The markets just kept on going and I lo st a lot. Eventually, I saw the futility of my 
approach and quit for a while. 
What is the most important advice  you can give the average trader? 
That he should find a superior trader to do his trad ing for him, and then go find something he really 
loves to do. 
Do you believe chart reading can be used for successful trading? 
I consider trend following to be a subset of char ting. Charting is a little like surfing. You don't have 
to know a lot about the physics of tides, resonan ce, and fluid dynamics in  order to catch a good 
wave. You just have to be able to sense when it's  happening and then have the drive to act at the 
right time. 
What was your personal experience in October 1987? 
I made money on the day of the October 1987 crash. I also made money for the month as a whole, 
and for the year, as well. I lost on the day after the crash, however, since I was short the interest 
rate markets. Most trend traders were likely either  out or short stocks a nd stock indexes during the 
crash. 
Are the markets different now th an they were five to ten ye ars ago because of the much 
greater current participation by professional managers? 
No. The markets are the same now as they were five to ten years ago because they keep changing—
just like they did then. 
Does trading become more difficult as your size increases? 
It becomes more difficult because it is harder to  move large positions without moving the market. It 
becomes easier because you have more acc ess to competent people to support you. 
What type of support do you mean? 
A team of experienced brokers wi th professional attitudes. E xperienced' traders can be very 
supportive by just being there for sharing joys and so rrows. Also, the old-timers seem to be able to 
smell the beginnings and endings of major moves. I al so receive important  support from my 
friends, associates, and family. 
Do you use any outside advisory services? 
I keep track of a lot of outside advisers, mostly by reading the bus iness press or hearing from my 
brokers. The services usually break even, except wh en they start to gloat, then they are likely 
headed for trouble. 
How about market letters? 
Market letters tend to lag behind the market since they generally respond to demand for news about 
recent activity. Although there are ce rtainly important exceptions, lette r writing is often a beginning 
job in the industry, and as such may be handled  by inexperienced trader s or non-traders. Good 
traders trade. Good letter writers write letters. 
Do you use the opinions of other traders in making trading decisions, or do you operate 
completely solo? 
I usually ignore advice from other traders, especi ally the ones who believ e they are on to a "sure 
thing." The old-timers, who talk about "maybe ther e is a chance of so and so," are often right and 
early. 
At what point did you get the confidence that  you could keep on winning as a trader? 
I vacillate between (a) "I can keep on winning," a nd (b) "I have just been lucky." I sometimes get 
most confident of my ability just before a major losing streak. 
How similar are the price pa tterns in different markets? 
Common patterns transcend individu al market behavior. For exampl e, bond prices have a lot in  84common with the way cockroaches crawl up and down a wall. Unfortunately for cockroach 
followers, there is usually no one around to take the other side of a trade. 
Does the stock market behave differently from other markets? 
The stock market behaves differently from all ot her markets and it also behaves differently from 
the stock market. If this is hard to understand, it is because trying to understand the markets is a bit 
futile. I don't think it makes any more sense trying to understand the stock market than trying to 
understand music. A lot of people would rather  understand the market  than make money. 
What do you mean, "The stock market be haves differently from the stock market"? 
The stock market behaves differently from itself in  that easily identifiable patterns seldom exactly 
repeat. 
What is your long-term outlook for inflation, the dollar, and gold? 
Inflation is part of the way societies sweep away  the old order. All currencies eventually get 
debased—like it or not. Compute one penny invest ed at the time of Christ, compounded at 3 
percent per year. Then consider why nobody has anywhere near that amount these days. 
Gold tends to be dug up, refined, and then buried again. The geographical en tropy of all gold on the 
planet seems to decrease over time. A lot has been  collected in vaults. I project the trend as one 
toward a central world gold stash. 
Do great traders have a special talent for trading? 
Good traders have a special talent for trading just  as good musicians and good athletes have talents 
for their fields. Great traders are ones who are ab sorbed by the talent. They don't have the talent—
the talent has them. 
What is the balance between talent versus work in trading success? 
I don't know where one starts and the other stops. 
How much of a role does lu ck play in trading success? 
Luck plays an enormous role in  trading success. Some people we re lucky enough to be born smart, 
while others were even smarter and got born lucky. 
How about a serious answer? 
"Luck" or "smarts" or "gift" ar e words indicating an attitudinal pr oclivity for mastery. One tends to 
do well at one's calling. I think most good traders have a little extra spark about trading. Some 
people are natural musicians or pain ters or salesmen or analysts. I think it is difficult to acquire 
talent for trading. However, if it is alrea dy there, it can be discovered and developed. 
What effect has trading had on your personal life? 
My personal life is integrated with my trading life.  
Is the joy of winning as intense as the pain of losing? 
The joy of winning and the pain of losing are right up there with the pain of  winning and the joy of 
losing. Also to consider are the joy and pain of not participating. The rela tive strengths of these 
feelings tend to increase with the distance of th e trader from his commitment to being a trader. 
When you made your first few million, did you  lock some of it aw ay to avoid the Jesse 
Livermore experience? [Livermore was a famous  speculator of the early twentieth century 
who made and lost several fortunes.] 
I feel the Livermore ex perience was a function of his psychol ogy and had little to do with the 
location of his assets. In fact, I remember reading that Jesse Liverm ore used to lock some of his 
winnings away and then find a key when he needed  to get at them. Therefore, locking up winnings 
would be necessary to emulate his experience, not to avoid it.  Furthermore, you would probably 
also need to overtrade and have wipeouts, wh ile you simultaneously fired up your emotions with 
the burning desire to "win it right  back." Acting out this drama c ould be exciting. However, it also 
seems terribly expensive. One alternative is to k eep bets small and then to systematically keep 
reducing risk during equity drawdowns. That wa y you approach your safe money asymptotically 
and have a gentle financial and emotional touchdown.  85I notice there is no quote  machine on your desk. 
Having a quote machine is like having a slot mach ine on your desk— you end up feeding it all day 
long. I get my price data after the close each day. 
Why do so many traders fail in the marketplace? 
For the same reason that most baby turtles fail to reach maturity: Many are called and few are 
chosen. Society works by the attraction of the ma ny. As they are culled ou t, the good ones are left, 
and the others are released  to go try something else  until they find their calli ng. The same is true for 
other fields of pursuit. 
What can a losing trader do to transform himself into a winning trader? 
A losing trader can do little to tran sform himself into a winning trad er. A losing trader is not going 
to want to transform himself. That' s the kind of thing winning traders do. 
How would you rate the relative importance between psychology and market analysis to 
successful trading? 
Psychology motivates the quality of analysis a nd puts it to use. Psychology is the driver and 
analysis is the road map. 
You have focused a lot on the field of psycholo gy. Can you tell by talking to a person whether 
that person would probably be  a winning or losing trader? 
Yes, the winning traders have usually been winni ng at whatever field they are in for years. 
What traits do you look for to id entify the winning trader personality? 
1. Не/she loves to trade; and 
2. Не/she loves to win. 
Don't all traders want to win? 
Win or lose, everybody gets what they want out of th e market. Some people seem to like to lose, so 
they win by losing money. 
I know one trader who seems to get in near the st art of every substantial bull move and works his 
$10 thousand up to about a quarter of a million in  a couple of months. Then he changes his 
personality and loses it all back ag ain. This process repeats like cl ockwork. Once I traded with him, 
but got out when his personality changed. I doubled my money, while he wiped out as usual. I told 
him what I was doing, and even paid him a manageme nt fee. He just couldn't help himself. I don't 
think he can do it any differently. He wouldn't want t o. He gets a lot of excite ment, he gets to be a 
martyr, he gets sympathy from his friends, and he gets to be the cen ter of attention. Also, possibly, 
he may be more comfortable relating to people if he  is on their financial plane. On some level, I 
think he is really getting what he wants. 
I think that if people look deeply enough into thei r trading patterns, they find that, on balance, 
including all their goals, they are really getting what they want, even though they may not 
understand it or want to admit it. 
A doctor friend of mine tells a story about a cancer patient w ho used her cond ition to demand 
attention and, in general, to dominate others ar ound her. As an experiment prearranged with her 
family, the doctor told her a shot was available wh ich would cure her. She constantly found excuses 
to avoid appearing for the shot and eventually avoi ded it entirely. Perhaps her political position was 
more important than her life. People' s trading pe rformance probably reflects their priorities more 
than they would like to admit. 
I think that some of the most fl amboyant and interesting traders ar e playing for more than profits 
alone; they are probably also playin g for excitement. One of the best ways to increase profits is to 
do goal setting and visualizations in order to align the conscious and subconscious with making 
profits. I have worked with a numbe r of traders in order to examine their priorities and align their 
goals. I use a combination of hypnosis, breathing, pacing, visualization, gestalt, massage, and so 
forth. The traders usually either (1 ) get much more successful, or (2) realize they didn't really want 
to be traders in the first place. 
Surely, some people lose because they lack the skill, even though they really want to win. 
It is a happy circumstance that when nature give s us true burning desires,  she also gives us the  86means to satisfy them. Those who want to win a nd lack skill can get someone with skill to help 
them. 
I sometimes have dreams related to the impe nding direction of a market. Although these 
dreams tend to be very infrequent, uncannily  they often prove right. Have you had any 
similar experiences? 
I know several people who claim to have market  insights during dreams. I think one of the 
functions of dreams is to reconcile informatio n and feelings which th e conscious mind finds 
intractable. For instance, I once told a lot of my fr iends that I expected silver to keep on going up. 
When it went down instead, I igno red the signs and tried to tell myself it was just a temporary 
correction. I stood to lose face and money. I couldn' t afford to be wrong. Around that time, I had 
dreams of being in a big, shiny, silver aircraft that stalled out and started going down toward an 
inevitable crash. I eventually dumped my silver po sition, even went short, and the dreams stopped. 
How do you judge success? 
I don't judge success. I celebrate it. I think su ccess has to do with finding and following one's 
calling regardless of financial gain. 
Don't be fooled by the humor in Seykota's comments; there is a great deal of  serious wisdom in his 
pithy replies. For me personally, the most striking comment was: "Everybody gets what they want 
out of the market." When Seykota first made this remark, I thought he was merely being cute. But I 
soon realized he was deadly serious . My reflexive response to this pr emise was disbelief: It implies 
that all losers want to lose a nd all winners who fall short of thei r goals (like myself) are fulfilling 
some inner need for a constrained threshold of success—a difficult proposition to swallow. 
Although my rigidly logical mind would normally dismiss the idea, my respect for Seykota's 
knowledge about markets and people forces me to cons ider the potential truth of the statement that 
everybody gets what they want out of the market—a most provocative concept.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  87Larry Hite-Respecting Risk 
Larry Hite's interest in the financial markets was sparked by a college course, but his path to Wall 
Street was as circuitous as Moses' to the Land of Israel. His early adult year s did not offer any clue 
that this was a young man headed for eventual ma jor success. First, his academic performance was 
inauspicious. Then he went through a string of odd jobs, never managing to hold any for very long. 
Eventually, he drifted into a dual  career of actor and screenwrite r. While not reco rding any major 
successes, he managed to support himself, and enj oyed his work. One of his movie scripts, which 
never found its way into production, was optioned so of ten that he began to vi ew it as a source of 
steady income. 
One day, Hite heard H. L. Hunt on the radio describing how he made  his fortune buying up lots of 
cheap oil right options, which gave him the oppor tunity for occasional windfall profits with 
minimal risk. That same night, Hite briefly met Brian Epstein, the manager of the Beatles, at a 
party. The two ideas fused in his mind, leading to another career change. He thought to himself, 
"Here is something [a rock prom oter] that has the potential fo r making a lot of money with a 
minimal investment." Although he landed a few reco rd contracts for some of his groups, none ever 
reached true stardom. Once again, although his success was limited, he managed to earn a 
satisfactory living in a self- employed position. 
Meanwhile, Hite's real interest remained in th e financial markets. "You often hear about people 
working on Wall Street to become screenwriters. I may be the only person who ever worked as an 
actor and a scriptwriterto pay fo rmy Wall Street career," he says  jokingly. In 1968, Hite finally 
decided to pursue his primary interest. While fascin ated with the futures mark ets, he didn't have the 
slightest idea how to break into that field, so he  began as a stockbroker. Several years later, he 
became a full-time commodities broker. 
More than a decade passed before Hite, convinced th at he had learned the ingredients necessary for 
successful long-term trading performance, took the init ial steps that led to the ultimate formation of 
Mint Investment Management Company. He realized that his trading ideas n eeded to be subjected 
to rigorous scientific testing. With  an offer of partnership, but no immediate pay, he enlisted Peter 
Matthews, who held a Ph.D. in st atistics. One year later, he hired Michael Delman, a designer of 
computer systems for a defense electronics firm. Matthews and Delman br ought their own ideas to 
the table, but perhaps even more significantly, th eir work provided the mathematical proof that 
Hite's trading concepts were i ndeed statistically sound. Hite is emphatic that Mint's success would 
not have been possible without Matthews and Delman. 
Mint's objective was never to make the largest pe rcentage return. Rather, Hite's philosophy was to 
aim for the best growth rate consistent with extremel y rigorous risk control. It  is in this perspective 
(return relative to risk) that Mint really shines. From the in ception of trading in April 1981 through 
mid-1988, Mint registered an aver age annual compounded return of ov er 30 percent. But it is their 
consistency that is most impressive: their annua l returns have ranged from a worst of plus 13 
percent to a best of plus 60 per cent. Their largest loss in any si x-month period was only 15 percent 
and under 1 percent in any twelve-mont h period (not just calendar years). 
Not surprisingly, Mint's stellar performance has re sulted in a spectacular gr owth of equity under 
management. In April 1981, they began trading with $2 million; today, they manage over $800 
million. Significantly, there is no evidence that th e surge of money under management has had any 
deleterious effect on performance.  Hite believes that Mint can ultimately manage $2 billion—an 
unprecedentedly large sum for a futures fund. 
Our interview was conducted over lunch at Window s of the World atop New York's World Trade 
Center, on a day it was blanketed w ith clouds. We took the hint when we were the last ones left in 
the restaurant and finished the interview in Hite's office. 
How did you first get interested in markets? 
When I was in college, I took a business course  with a professor who ha d a trenchant sense of 
humor. To give you an example, he also worked  as a bank examiner. On e day, before leaving the 
bank following an audit, he turned  to the bank president and, as a joke, said, "Got  you!" The man 
had a heart attack on the spot. After that, they did another audit and found that the bank president 
had embezzled $75,000. Anyway, in class one day, th is professor is reviewing all the financial  88instruments: stocks, bonds, and so on. Then he says , "Now we come to the craziest market of all—
commodities. Thesepeople trade on only 5 percentmargin—and most of them borrow that." The 
whole class laughed, except me. For some reason, th e idea of trading on 5 percent margin made 
perfect sense tome. 
When did you first get involve d in the financial markets? 
Not until many years later. I was a rock promoter at the time, and on one weekend, there were three 
separate shootings in clubs at  which the groups I managed were  working. I decided it was an 
opportune time to change careers and pursue my tr ue interest—the financ ial markets. Although I 
was really interested in futures, I didn't have any idea how to look for a job in that field. So I 
decided I would start out as a stockbroker. 
My first interview was with a very old-line Wall Street firm, with offices that made you feel like 
you should speak in hushed tones. The man who in terviewed me was the kind of guy [he adopts a 
pompously refined voice] who talks with his teeth together and lives in Connecticut. He tells me, 
"We only buy blue chips for our clients." 
Not having a financial background, I was unfamiliar with the term  "blue chip," but it sounded odd 
to me in the context of a staid investment firm. So after the inte rview, I looked up its derivation. I 
found that the origin of the term could be traced to the color of th e most expensive chip in Monte 
Carlo. I said to myself, "Aha, now I know what this game is all about—gambling." I threw away 
my copy of Graham and Dodd [Principles of Security Analysis, considered by many to be the 
"bible" of stock market an alysis] and bought a book called Beat the Dealer. I came away with the 
idea that successful investment was really a matter of odds, and if you could compute the odds, you 
could find and test methods th at could beat the market. 
What made you believe that you could deve lop methods to put the odds in your favor? 
I don't know that I understood it all then, but over th e years I came to reali ze that the markets are 
inefficient. I have a friend who is an economist. He  would try to explain to me, as if talking to a 
child, why what I was trying to do was futile, becau se "the markets are efficient." I have noticed 
that everyone who has ever told me that the market s are efficient is poor. He argued that if I could 
develop a winning system on a computer, so could ot hers, and we would all cancel each other out. 
What is wrong with that argument? 
Because people develop systems and people will make  mistakes. Some will alter their system or 
jump from system to system as each one has a lo sing period. Others will be unable to resist second-
guessing the trading signals. Whenever I go to a m oney management conference and sit down with 
a group to have some drinks at night, I always hear  the same story. "My system worked great, but I 
just didn't take the gold trade, and that  would have been my biggest winner." 
There is a very important message here: People don' t change. That is why this whole game works. 
In 1637, tulips in Holland traded for 5,500 florins and then crashed to 50, a 99 percent loss. Well, 
you might say, "Trading was relatively new then; th ese people were primitive; capitalism was still 
in its infancy. Today we are much more sophisti cated." So you go to 1929 and find a stock like Air 
Reduction which traded at a high of $233 and after the crash fell to $31, a decline of 87 percent. 
OK, you might say, "The Roaring '20s were crazy tim es, but now things are su rely different." Move 
ahead to 1961 and you find a stock called Texas Inst ruments trading at $207. It eventually dropped 
to $49, a decline of 77 percent. If you think we have gotten more sophisti cated in the 1980s, all you 
have to do is look at silver pri ces, which in 1980 reached a peak of $50 and subsequently fell to $5, 
a 90 percent decline. 
The point is that because people are the same, if you use sufficiently rigorous methods to avoid 
hindsight, you can test a system and see how it w ould have done in the past and get a fairly good 
idea of how that system will perform in the future. That is our edge. 
Isn't it possible that the markets can change and the future will be very different from the 
past? 
The markets may change, but people won't. When we  were still in the testing stage, before we 
actually started managing any money, my partner Michael Delman came up with the concept of 
using holding periods as a measure of system pe rformance. Evaluating systems solely on a calendar  89year basis is very arbitrary. What you really wa nt to know are the odds for profitable performance 
in a holding period of any length. In our simulations, Peter determ ined that 90 percent of all the six- 
month holding periods, 97 percent of the twelve -month periods, and 100 percent of the eighteen-
month periods would be profitable. After over seven years of actual trading, the numbers turned out 
to be 90 percent, 99 per cent, and 100 percent. 
I will tell you how confident I am of the future va lidity of our evaluation proc ess. There is a fellow 
who works for us who used to be a colonel in  the British army. His service specialty was 
dismantling bombs all over the world. I asked him, "How did you do it?" "It wasn't that difficult," 
he says. "There are different styles  of bombs; a bomb in Malaysia is different from a bomb in the 
Middle East. You go there and see wh at kind of bomb it is and take it apart." I said, "Let me ask 
you a question. What happens when you come acro ss a bomb that, you don't know?" He looks me 
in the eye and says, "You r ecord your first impression and hope it is not your last." 
I came into the office one day and found this same steel-nerved individual vi rtually on the brink of 
tears. I asked him what was wrong. It turned ou t that the Fed had made a major policy change, 
which dramatically reversed ma ny major market trends. Overnigh t, our fund, which had gone from 
a starting value of $10 to nearly $15, had fallen back to under $12, ju st after he had opened a major 
Swiss bank as an account. I told him, "Get them on the phone." "What?" he asked somewhat 
confused. I repeated [speaking more slowly and em phatically], "G-e-t t-h-e- m o-n t-h-e p-h-o-n-e." 
When I was a broker, my boss taught me that if you don't call your client when he is losing money, 
someone else will. And, to be honest, when I was a broker, I did the same thing. When I called 
prospects and they complained a bout their broker, I would say, "O h, how could he put you in that 
trade?" 
So I get the account on the phone and e xplain that our simulations show that this type of event will 
occur once every few years and that I am confident that in nine months th e fund will be back to a 
new high. "In fact," I said, "I have just borrowed some money to add to my own investment in the 
fund." "You really did that?" he asked in a surprised tone . I assured him that I did. 
Well, the account doubled up on their investment, a nd the fund immediately s hot straight up. Today 
that account is one of our biggest clients. How c ould I be so sure? I knew what those systems were 
about. What makes this business so fabulous is  that, while you may not know what will happen 
tomorrow, you can have a very good id ea what will happen over the long ran. 
The insurance business provides a perfect anal ogy. Take one sixty-yea r-old guy and you have 
absolutely no idea what the odds are that he will be alive one year later. However, if you take 
100,000 sixty-year-olds, you can get an  excellent estimate of how ma ny of them will be alive one 
year later. We do the same thing; we let the law of large numbers work for us. In a sense, we are 
trading actuaries. 
I have a friend who went broke trading futures. He can't understand how I can trade by following a 
computerized system religiously. We were play ing tennis one day and he asked me, "Larry, how 
can you trade the way you do; isn't it boring?" I told  him, "I don't trade for excitement; I trade to 
win." It may be very dull, but it is also very lucrative. When I ge t together with other traders and 
they start exchanging war stories about different tr ades, I have nothing to sa y. To me, all our trades 
are the same. 
There are many money managers who use trend-following systems—and quite a few of those 
don't second-guess their own systems. What ma kes Mint different? How have you been able 
to achieve return/risk ratios far above the industry average? 
Because we know that we don't know. No matter what information you have, no matter what you 
are doing, you can be wrong. I have a friend who has amassed a fortune in excess of $100 million. 
He taught me two basic lessons. First, if you neve r bet your lifesty le, from a trading standpoint, 
nothing bad will ever happen to you. Second, if you know what the worst possible outcome is, it 
gives you tremendous freedom. The tr uth is that, while you can't quantify reward, you can quantify 
risk. I will give you an example how important th is advice is. One of the world's largest coffee 
traders invited me to his house in London. When I wa lked into his library, I noticed he had just 
about every book ever written on power. He took me to  one of the finest restaurants I have ever 
been at. At dinner, he asked me, "Larry, how can you know more about coffee than me? I am the 
largest trader in the world. I know  where the boats are; I know th e ministers." "You are right," I  90answered, "I don't know anything ab out coffee. In fact, I don't even  drink it." "How do you trade it 
then?" he asked. I told him, " I ju st look at the risk." Well this great meal la sted for several hours. 
Five times he asked me what I did, and five times I told him that I managed the risk. 
Three months later I heard that he had blow n $100 million in the coffee market. He obviously 
didn't get the message. And you want to know some thing? He does know more about coffee than I 
do. But the point is, he didn't look at the risk. 
So the very first rale we live by at Mint is: Neve r risk more than 1 percent of total equity on any 
trade. By only risking 1 percent, 1 am indifferent  to any individual trade. Keeping your risk small 
and constant is absolutely critical. For exampl e, one manager I know had a large account that 
withdrew half the money he was trading. Instead of cutting his position size in half, this manager 
kept trading the same number of contracts. Eventually, that half  of the original money became 
lOpercent of the money. Risk is  a no-fooling-around game; it does not allow for mistakes. If you do 
not manage the risk, eventually they will carry you out. 
The second thing we do at Mint is that we always follow the trends  and we never deviate from our 
methods. In fact, we have a written agreement th at none of us can ever countermand our system. 
The trades are all the same. That is the reason w hy we have never had a ba d trade at Mint. There 
are really four kinds of trades  or bets: good bets, bad bets, winni ng bets, and losing bets. Most 
people think that a losing trade was a bad bet. Th at is absolutely wrong. Y ou can lose money even 
on a good bet. If the odds on a bet are 50/50 and the payoff is $2 versus a $1 risk, that is a good bet 
even if you lose. The important point is that if  you do enough of those trades or bets, eventually 
you have to come out ahead. 
The third thing we do to reduce risk  is diversify. We diversify in tw o ways. First, we probably trade 
more markets worldwide than any other money ma nager. Second, we don't just use a single best 
system. To provide balance, we use lots of diffe rent systems ranging from short term to long term. 
Some of these systems may not be that good by th emselves, but we really don't care; that is not 
what they are there for. 
The fourth thing Mint does to manage risk is track volatility. When the volatility of a market 
becomes so great that it adversely skews the expect ed return/risk ratio, we will stop trading that 
market. 
Essentially, our approach has three lights in de termining the acceptance of trading signals. When 
the light is green, we take all signals. When th e light is yellow, we will liquidate an existing 
position on a signal, but we will not put on a ne w position. Finally, when the light is red, we 
liquidate existing positions automaticall y, and we do not take any new positions. 
For example, in 1986, when coffee went from $ 1.30 to $2.80 and back to $1.00, we got out of our 
long positions on the way up at $1.70 and didn't trade the market for th e rest of the price climb and 
subsequent collapse. Now, while we may have lo st some additional profits, being out of markets 
like that is one of the ways we are able  to achieve such rigid risk control. 
So one of the key differences between you and other trend-following managers is that you 
have developed a way of defining when not to play? 
In any situation or game, you can define a posi tional advantage for any player—even the weakest 
one. In trading, you can define three categories of pl ayers: the trade, the floor, and the speculator. 
The trade has the best product knowledge and the best ways of getting out of positions. For ex-
ample, if they are caught in a bad position in the fu tures markets, they can offset their risk in the 
cash market. The floor has the adva ntage of speed. You can never be  faster than the floor. While 
the speculator doesn't have the product knowledge or  the speed, he does have  the advantage of not 
having to play. The speculator can choose to only bet when the odds are in his favor. That is an 
important positional advantage. 
You mentioned before that you used increased volat ility as a signal to stop trading a market. 
How many days of past data do you use to determine your volatility filter? 
Anywhere from ten to 100 days. 
When you say ten to 100, are you trying to be deliberately ambi guous or do you mean you use 
different time frames within that range? 
We look at different tim e windows in that range.  91I fully understand the logic of your 1 percent stop-loss rule. However, my one question is: 
Once you are stopped out of a position without the system providing an opposite signal,* 
what gets you back into the trade if the market  reverses to its original direction? Isn't it 
possible that you could get stopped out on a moderate price reaction and then miss a 
subsequent major move? 
If the market makes a new high, we get back in. 
*For example, if a long position is stopped out on a money management rule without a sell signal 
actually being generated, the sy stem will still be in a long mode and no buy signal will be 
generated, no matter how high pr ices go. (If, however, a sell signa l were generated, the system 
would begin monitoring for a buy signal.) 
But suppose that the market goes  into a wide trading range, might you not get continuously 
whipped between being stopped out and reentering the position at new highs? 
That happens, but not enough to be a problem. 
You have an incredibly strong respect for ri sk. Were there any personal events in your 
trading career that ingraine d you with that attitude? 
When I first became involved in commodities, I noticed that if you bought pork bellies in 
September and sold them before July, you almost al ways made a profit. So I formed a fund with a 
group of friends, and I put on this trade. It worked. I doubled the money. I felt like a genius. 
At the time, I had a friend who followed the corn market. I didn't know anything about corn; I only 
knew about pork bellies. He talked me into bu ying the new crop corn a nd selling the old crop. 
Since this was supposed to be a relatively safe trad e, in that I was offsetting my long position in one 
contract month with a short position in another month, I really loaded up. Shortly thereafter, the 
government released a surprising crop estimate. In  response, the month I was long went limit-down 
and the month I was short went limit-up. 
I was in such despair that I remember walking ou t to the stairway and lit erally getting down on my 
knees and saying out loud, "Dear God, I don't care how much I lose, but please don't let the account 
go into a debit." At the time, I was working for a s ophisticated intern ational firm, and just as I was 
making my providential plea,  a Swiss banker came walking down the staircase. To this day, I still 
wonder what he must have thought. 
Were there any other personal tr aumatic experiences caused by a failure to heed market 
risk? 
Not for myself, but throughout my financial career, I have continually witne ssed examples of other 
people that I have known be ing ruined by a failure to respect ris k. If you don't take a hard look at 
risk, it will take you. 
When I was a kid and got my first motorcycle, I had an older friend who would always get into 
fights. He told me, "Larry, when you are on a moto rcycle, never argue with  a car. You will lose." 
The same lesson applies to trading: If  you argue with the market, you will lose. 
The Hunt brothers are a perfect  example. Somebody once asked me , "How could the Hunts lose? 
They were worth billions." Let's say you have a billion dollars, and you buy $20 billion worth of 
silver—I am making these numbers up for the sake  of the example—you are in exactly the same 
risk position as the guy with $1,000 who owns $20,000 worth of silver. 
I have a good friend who started from very humb le beginnings; his father was a sanitation man. 
Anyway, he is a very bright guy and he got into  option arbitrage. He was extremely good at it and 
made a fortune. I remember visiting him at a palatial estate he bought in England. 
Well, he may have been a great ar bitrageur, but he turned out to be a bad trader. He developed a 
trading system that made money. On e day he said to me, "I am not taking the sell signal in gold; it 
doesn't look right to me. Besides, almost 50 pe rcent of the signals ar e wrong anyway." Not only 
didn't he take the sell signal, he actually wound up going long. Sure enough, the market went down. 
I told him, "Get out!" but he insi sted, "The market will come back." 
Well, he didn't get out, and he lost the mansion and everything else. Now he lives in a rented box 
on a street with a hundred other ti cky-tacky houses. To this day, I still remember the name of his 
estate: "Beverly." He is still one of my best  friends, and his loss of that huge house had an 
enormous emotional impact on me. He had it and lost it all! And all because of one trade. The irony  92is that if he had followed his system, he would have made a fortune on that trade. 
I will tell you another story. I have a cousin who turned $5,000 into $100,000 in the option market. 
One day I asked him, "How did you do it?" He answ ered, "It is very easy. I buy an option and if it 
goes up, I stay in, but if it goes down, I don't get out unt il I am at least even." I told him, "Look, I 
trade for a living, and I can tell you that strategy is ju st not going to work in the long ran." He said, 
"Larry, don't worry, it doesn't have to work in the long run, just till I make  a million. I know what I 
am doing. I just never take a loss." I said, "OK..." 
In his next trade he buys $90,000 worth of Merrill Lynch options, only this time, it goes down, and 
down, and down. I talk to him about one month la ter, and he tells me he is in debt for $10,000.1 
said, "Wait a minute. You had $100,000 and you bought  $90,000 in options. That should still leave 
you with $10,000, even after they expired worthless. How coul d you have a deficit of $10,000?" He 
said, "I originally bought the optio ns at $4k. When the price went down to $1,1 figured out that if I 
bought another 20,000, all it had to do was go back to $2^ for me to break even. So I went to the 
bank and borrowed $10,000." 
Respect for risk is not just a matter of trading; it applies to any type of  business decision. I once 
worked for a firm where the company president, a very nice guy, hired an option trader who was 
brilliant, but not stable. One day the option trader disappeared, leav ing the firm stuck with a losing 
position. The president was not a trader, and he sought my advice. "Larry, what do you think I 
should do?" I told him, "Just get out of the positi on." Instead, he decided to hold on to the trade. 
The loss got a little worse, but then the market came back, and he  liquidated the pos ition at a small 
profit. 
After this incident, I told a friend who worked at the same firm, "Bob, we are going to have to find 
another job." "Why?" he asked. I answered, "We wo rk for a man who has just found himself in the 
middle of a mine field, and what he did was close his eyes and walk  through it. He no w thinks that 
whenever you are in the middle of a mine field, th e proper technique is to close your eyes and go 
forward. Less than one year later, this same man had to liquidate a huge delta neutral spread 
position in options [a balanced position w hose value will change very li ttle for small price moves in 
either direction]. Instead of just getting out, he decided to get out of the position one leg at a time. 
By the time he finished liquidating that position, he had gone through all of the firm's capital. 
Besides errors in risk control, why do people lose money trading? 
Sometimes, because their trades ar e based on a personal bias, instead  of a statistical approach. For 
example, there is a regular panelist on "Wall Street  Week" who is about sixt y-five or se venty years 
old. On the show one day, he sa id that the lesson his father taught him was, "Bonds are the 
cornerstone of your portfolio." Thin k about that! Since this man firs t got into the business, he has 
seen interest rates go down only once out of every eight у ears. [Bonds go up when interest rates 
decline.] Obviously, the name "bonds" mean s a lot more to him than the reality. 
You trade a very wide variety of markets.  Do you trade them all the same way? 
We don't trade markets, we trade money. Mickey Quenington, who is our marketing director, once 
introduced me to a former chief executive of this firm [E. F. Man, the firm to which Hite gave 50 
percent ownership in his management company in exchange for financial backing]. This guy was a 
tough, old Irishman and he asked me, "How do you differentiate between gol d and cocoa in your 
trading?" I answered, "They are both a 1 percent be t; they are the same to me." He was outraged. 
He practically shouted back at me, "You mean to  tell me that you don't see any difference between 
gold and cocoa?" I think if it wasn't for the fact that he liked Mickey so much, he would have 
thrown me out of his office. 
I married a very proper English wo man who is always concerned that her family considers me a bit 
crass. I was once intervie wed by a reporter from the London Times, who asked me what I thought 
about the future direction of the London cocoa ma rket. I told him, "Frankly, I don't see markets; I 
see risks, rewards, and money." I was the last person quoted in that article. He finished it by saying, 
"Mr. Hite doesn't care about the cocoa market, al l he cares about is mone y." My wife read the 
article and said, "Great. Now I'll never be able to go home; this will just prove to my family that 
they were right about you all along." 
I assume that if you trade all markets the same, you probably don't believe in optimization.  93[Optimization refers to the process of testing many variations of a system for the past and 
then selecting the best -performing version for actual trad ing. The problem with this fine-
tuned approach is that the link between past and future performance is often a very rough 
one.] 
Absolutely. We have a saying here : "It is incredible how rich you can get by not being perfect." We 
are not looking for the optimum method; we are looking for the hardiest method. Anyone can sit 
down and devise a perfect system for the past. 
Are there any technical indicators th at you have found to be overrated? 
Overbought/oversold indicators. None of them seem to prove out in testing. 
Any types of indicators you consider particularly valuable? 
Although I don't really trade off of them, there are tw o that come to mind. First, if a market doesn't 
respond to important news in the way that it should, it  is telling you something very important. For 
example, when the news of the Iran/Iraq war fi rst came out over the newswire, gold was only able 
to move up $1.1 said to myself, "A Middle East war has just broken out and the best the gold 
market can do is go up $1; it has to be a great sale." The market broke sharply after that. The 
second item is something that Ed Seykota taught me. When a market makes a historic high, it is 
telling you something. No matter how many people te ll you why the market s houldn't be that high, 
or why nothing has changed, the mere fact that th e price is at a new high tells you something has 
changed. 
Any other lessons that you learned from Ed Seykota? 
Ed Seykota actually explained his philosophy one day: "You can risk 1 percent of y our capital, you 
can risk 5 percent, or you can risk 10 percent, but you better re alize that the more you risk, the 
more volatile the results are going to be." And he was absolutely right. 
Besides your partners, who I know were integral  in developing your trading systems, were 
there any other traders who taught you valuable lessons? 
Absolutely. Jack Boyd, who hired me as a broker/ analyst. Having read that Handy and Harman had 
said in their annual report that silver stocks totaled either three billion or  seven billion ounces, I 
wrote a report on the silver market in which I said, "According to Handy and Harman, there is 
either twice as much silver as some people think or less than half." That report went over very big 
with Jack and helped me land the job. 
Jack had been putting out trading recommendations fo r his firm for many years. I found that if you 
followed all of his recommendations, you would have  made money in every year. Finally, I asked 
Jack how he did it. You have to picture that Jack  was six foot-four. He said, "Larry, if you want to 
know where a market is going, all you have to do is this." He thre w his charts on the floor and 
jumped up on his desk. He sai d, "Look at it, it will tell you!" 
I assume by that, he meant get a perspective of the big picture. 
Right, because I don't know of too many people who get rich by taking small profits. Working with 
Boyd was extremely important forme. From the tim e I met him, I knew that his approach was the 
right way to do it. In other words, I knew that if you traded across the boa rd, controlled your risk, 
and went with the trend, it just had to work. I could see it absolutely clearly. 
Any final words? 
I have two basic rales about winning in trading as well as in life: (1) If you don't bet, you can't win. 
(2) If you lose all your chips, you can't bet. 
There are two basic elements to Hite's trading ph ilosophy. First, contrary to the opinion of many 
academics, Hite is firmly convinced that the markets are inefficient. This means that if you can 
develop a method that places the odds in your favor (and it doesn't have to be by very much), you 
can win. Second, an effective method is a necessary, but  not sufficient, condition to win. In order to 
survive and thrive at trading, you also have to resp ect market risk. If you don't, sooner or later, it 
will get you. Hite controls risk rigorou sly by applying four basic principles: 
1. His system never trades counter to the market  trend. There are no exceptions, and he always 
follows the system.  942. The maximum risk on each trade is li mited to 1 percent of total equity. 
3. Mint carries diversificat ion to an extreme. First, their system is really a combination of many 
different systems, selected not only for their indi vidual performance, but also for their degree of 
lack of correlation with  other selected systems. Second, Mint trades in an extr aordinarily wide 
spectrum of markets (nearly sixty in all), encomp assing exchanges in the U.S. and five foreign 
countries and diverse market group s including stock indexes, intere st rates, currencies, raw in-
dustrial goods, and agricultural commodities. 
4. Volatility is continually tracked in each market in order to generate signals to liquidate or 
temporarily suspend trading in those markets where the risk/reward ratio exceeds well-defined 
limits. 
One final observation: After merely earning a mode st living at some colorful careers (such as, 
scriptwriter, actor, rock promoter), Larry Hite succeeded spectacularly in the single endeavor for 
which he had the greatest enthusiasm—fund manager.  I found this to be a striking example of Ed 
Seykota' s comment: "It is a happy circumstance that  when nature gives us true burning desires, it 
also gives us the means to satisfy them." 
 
 
 
 
  95Part II-Mostly Stocks   96Michael Steinhardt-The Concept of Variant Perception 
Michael Steinhardt's interest in the stock market da tes back to his bar mitzvah, when his father gave 
him 200 shares of stock as a present. He recalls  hanging out in the local  brokerage office as a 
teenager, watching the ticker tape along with th e old men, while his friends were out playing 
stickball. A very bright student, Steinhardt co mpleted his education at  an accelerated pace, 
graduating from the Wharton School of the Univ ersity of Pennsylvania in 1960 at the age of 
nineteen. Steinhardt headed straight  for Wall Street, landing his first job as a research assistant. In 
subsequent years, he held positi ons as a financial journalist and a research analyst. In 1967, having 
established a reputation as a ta lented analyst, Steinhardt and two other partners founded the 
investment firm of Steinhardt, Fine and Berkowitz—the predecesso r to Steinhardt Partners. (Fine 
and Berkowitz left the firm in the late 1970s.) 
In the twenty-one years since its inception, Steinhardt's firm has achieved a truly re markable track 
record. During that time, Steinhardt Partners has realized a compounded annual growth rate of over 
30 percent (just under 25 percent af ter subtracting a 20 pe rcent profit incentive fee). In comparison, 
the S&P 500 index registered only an 8.9 percen t compounded annual growth rate (dividends 
included) during the same period. One thousand dollars  invested with the firm  at its start in 1967 
would have grown to over $93,000 by Spring 1988 (after deducting prof  it incentive fees). To put 
that in perspective, the same $1,000 invested in a basket of S&P stocks would only have grown to 
$6,400. Gain is only part of the st ory; Steinhardt's tr ack record also demonstrates admirable 
consistency. Steinhardt Partners has only witnessed two losing years.  In both cases, the net loss was 
under 2 percent before profit incentive fee adjustments. 
Steinhardt's superior performance has been achieved by using a myriad of approaches. He is both a 
long-term investor and a short-term trader; he is as comfortable shorting stocks as buying them; he 
will shift major chunks of the fi rm's capital into other investment vehicles, such as treasury 
securities, if he feels that is  the best investment choice. 
To be sure, Steinhardt Partners' track record is  not a solo performance. In addition to his 
cofounding partners, over the years, the firm  has employed numerous traders and analysts. 
However, there was never any doubt that Steinhardt  was clearly in charge. He reviews the firm's 
portfolio several times each day. A lthough he gives the firm's trader s latitude to make their own 
judgments, Steinhardt will require a trader to rigorously justify his position if he has qualms about 
that position. If he feels str ongly enough, Steinhardt will override the trader and liquidate the 
position. 
Steinhardt's extreme scrutiny and co ntrol of the firm's portfolio ha s given him a reputation of being 
a very demanding man to work for— obviously, too demanding for many of the traders who have 
left the firm over the years. Keeping in mi nd that Steinhardt's wraparound desk has been 
constructed in the shape of a ship's bow, it is not surprising that one j ournalist doing a profile 
tagged him with the sobriquet, Captain Ahab. Ho wever, Steinhardt's tough side is very much 
related to his job role—much as in football co aching, toughness is probably a virtue in managing a 
group of traders. 
I never saw Steinhardt's tough side. The man I interv iewed was relaxed, soft  spoken, patient, and 
good humored. (Of course, our interviews were always conducted outside of market hours.) 
Steinhardt possesses a keen sense of humor. He ha s been known to call friends impersonating an 
IRS agent, deliberately mumble fictitious orders to brokers right before the market close, and 
double-talk in a Dr. Irwin Corey - like manner when he wishes to pu ll the leg of an analyst or 
reporter who calls him. His conversation is al so liberally sprinkled with Yid-dishisms—
"proprietary dreck," for example, is how  he refers to newfangled fund products. 
What are the major elements of your trading philosophy? 
The word "trading" is not the way I think of things. I may be a trader in the sense that my frequency 
of transactions is relatively high,  but the word "investing" would appl y just as much, if not more. In 
my mind, trading implies an anticipa tion of a sale at the time of purchase. For example, if I go long 
stock index futures tonight because I expect tomorrow's trade number will be bullish for the 
market, and I plan to sell my position tomorrow—th at is trading. The bulk of what I do is for a 
much longer duration and for more complex reas ons. For example, when I went long the debt  97markets in 1981, I held that posi tion for two and a half years. 
Well, for purposes of this book, I wo uld still call what you are doing trading. 
How then do you define the difference between trading and investing? 
I make two key distinctions. First, a trader w ill go short as readily as long. In contrast, the 
investor—for example, the portfolio manager of a typical mutual fund—will always be long. If he 
is uncertain about the market, he may be only 70 percent invested, but he is always long. The 
second distinction I make is that a trader is primar ily concerned about the direction of the market. Is 
the market, or stock, going up or down? The investor is more c oncerned about picking the best 
stocks to invest in. There is no value judgment involved in my distinc tion between traders and 
investors, it is merely a matter of  maintaining a certain thematic fo cus for this book. In  any case, on 
both counts, I would certainly quali fy you as a trader. To get back to my original question: How 
would you define your philosophy of trading?  
My particular style is a bit different from that  of most people. Concep t number one is variant 
perception. I try to develop perceptions that I beli eve are at variance with the general market view. 
I will play those variant perceptions  until I feel they are no longer so. 
Could you give me an exam ple of variant perception in the current marketplace? 
We have been short Genentech for a year and a half. There was a period of months and months 
when we lost a lot of money in that position. Bu t I stayed short because I continued to have a 
variant perception about th e future of their drug, TPA. [TPA can be injected intravenously to 
dissolve blood clots.] It is our perception that, in a year or two, TPA will be a minor drug that will 
be supplanted by more effective drugs that also co st substantially less. The thrust of the entire 
company has been based on this one drug. If our pe rception is correct, this company will be earning 
20 or 30 cents per share and selling for under $1 0. The stock is currently at $27 [June 1988], down 
from a high of $65. [By late November, Genentech had fallen below $15 and Steinhardt was still 
short.] But I think the general perception is still th at Genentech is a fi rst class biotechnology 
company that will produce many products that ar e going to revolutionize th e industry. As long as 
my view is a variant perc eption, I will stay short. 
That is a clear example, but it raises a questio n. Let's say you go short a stock because of your 
variant perception, and the position goes agains t you. If the fundamentals don't change, the 
more it goes against you, the more  attractive the short side wo uld appear. Yet from a money 
management standpoint, at some point, the posi tion would have to be covered. It seems like 
there might be two basic trading principles in conflict here. 
There are certain shibboleths that exist in the worl d of trading, which may or may not be accurate, 
but I have not followed them. For example, there is  a general view that you shouldn't short a stock 
until it has already peaked and started down—that you shouldn't go short unti l the stock is already 
reflecting problems that are evident for all to see. In some sense, I can understand that. Maybe that 
is a superficially safer way to short stocks and yo u can sleep more comfortably using that approach. 
However, I have never done it that  way. My attitude has always b een that to make money in the 
markets, you have to be willing to  get in the way of danger. I have  always tended to short stocks 
that were favorites and backed by a great deal of institutional enthusiasm. Genera lly speaking, I 
have tended to short too early and,  therefore, have usually starte d off with losses in my short 
positions. If I short a stock and it goes up a lot, it may skew my exposure a bit, but as long as my 
variant perception is unchanged, I'll stay short. If I'm wrong, I'm wrong. 
Are you saying that as long as you think the fundamentals, as you perceive them, are 
unchanged, you will hang tough no matter ho w much the position goes against you? 
Right. Of course, if it is triple horrible, I might  trade around the position to take the pressure down 
a little bit. I would say, "OK, this looks awful; I see nothing bu t buyers. Why don't I join the buyers 
and see if I can make some money." In a matte r of speaking, I dichotom ize myself. I have a 
fundamental view, which I believe in my heart, but I try to separate that from the short-term fervor 
and intensity I may see in the market. So even t hough I am short in that t ype of situation, I might 
periodically be a buyer.  98Might you actually go net long during those periods, or does your position just fluctuate 
between fully short and flat? 
It wouldn't even remotely approach flat, because that type of buying is based on very short-lived 
perceptions. I might take 20,30, or 40 percen t of the position an d trade with it. 
If you are very negative and shor t in a particular stock, but a re not necessarily bearish on the 
industry, might you sometimes hedge yourself by  buying another stock in that group against 
your short position? 
I have tried that at times, but ha ve generally found it to be unsucc essful. What it tends to do is give 
me two problems instead of one. Usually, your k nowledge about the second stock on the other side 
will tend to be relatively skimpy because you are just grasping at it to use as a hedge. If your 
problem is so great that you need  to hedge it, why not address the problem di rectly rather than 
taking on a totally separate position? Let's say you ar e short a paper stock and the paper stocks are 
roaring, so you buy another paper stock against it. Maybe your shor t stock will go up more; maybe 
the other stock will go up more. Who knows? If you ha ve made a mistake, deal with the mistake; 
don't compound it. 
Besides the variant perception concept, what a re some of the other elements of your trading 
philosophy? 
Nothing that is so distinctive. I don'tuse stop-loss orde rs or such. I don't use any rules about buying 
on weakness or strength. I don't look at br eakouts or breakdowns. I don't use charts. 
You don't use charts at all? 
Charts just leave me blank. [He adopts a Jackie Mason-like speech pattern.] I look at the stock. It 
has a fantastic chart. The chart has a base like this, and then if it goe s up a little bit more, boy it is a 
real breakout, blah, blah, blah, bla h. They all seem the same to me. 
But just from an informational standpoint, don' t you use charts as a quick and easy way to 
see where a stock has traded over the years? 
By watching stocks as closely as I do, I get some sense of price levels, uptrends, ranges, and all 
that. 
Let's say you know that a stock has gone from $10 to $40, wouldn't it matter to you how it 
went from $10 to $40? 
It makes no difference to me. 
Do you have any trading rules that you could define? 
Give me an example of a trading rale. 
A common example might be: Before I get into a position, I know exactly where I am getting 
out. It doesn't necessarily have to be a risk control rule, it could be— 
No, I don't have any rules about stops or objec tives. I simply don't think in those terms. 
At this point, there is a call on the speakerphone. The caller is givi ng Steinhardt some late-breaking 
news regarding a decision in a lawsuit against the tobacco industry. "The verdict is back. Everyone 
was cleared except the Liggett group who had to pay a $400,000 fine and no punitive damages." 
Steinhardt replies, "So it was basically a deci sion slightly in favor of the defendants." 
I went short the tobacco stocks about a month ago. My reasoning was that if the plaintiffs won the 
case, the stocks would go down a lot, but if the plaintiffs lost, the stoc ks wouldn't go up too much, 
since the tobacco companies had never lost a case and winning another one wouldn't really be 
news. That is an example of a variant perception. It will be interesting to see how much I will lose, 
because my original theory was that it wouldn't be much. Here it is [reading story headline from 
screen], "Liggett Group Found Liable for Cont ributing to Smoker's D eath." You know what, I 
won't lose anyway. A phrase like that will scare somebody. 
Going back to our discussion, let's say you are short a stock because of your fundamental 
analysis and the stock is going against you. How would you know when your analysis is wrong 
because you have overlooked some  unknown important element? 
That situation happens fairly often. You buy or sell a stock and it doesn't act the way you think it  99should. I go through my portfolio six times a day. There are many stoc ks in the portfolio that I am 
not directly responsible for. For example, someone else is short Ti me, Inc. They are short because 
the magazine business is lousy, and this or that. But the stock is acting really strong and is up 10 
percent from where we shorted it.  I will go over to th e person responsible for the Time Life 
position and ask several key questions: When are we going to get something that is going to 
surprise the world? When is something going to ha ppen that will ease the fee ling that this company 
is ripe for a takeover? 
In a sense, I am a negative monitor of the portfo lio. If there is a proble m with a position I will go 
through it very regularly. That makes me a very di fficult person here, because I only talk to people 
when things are lousy or when their stocks are not acting like they should. 
If a stock is not acting like it should based on  its fundamentals, would that be the type of 
market action that would change your thinking? 
I try to assume that the guy on the other side of a trade knows as least as much as I do. Let's say I 
buy Texaco at $52 and it suddenly goes down to $50. Whoever sold Texaco at $52 had a perception 
that was dramatically different from mine. It is  incumbent on me to find out what his perception 
was. 
What if you can't explain it? 
The explanation might be superficial or serious, but you can us ually get something. 
Let's take the situation of the tobacco companie s. On balance, the news that came out after 
the close sounded bearish. If the tobacco stocks  go down only modestly tomorrow and then 
come right back, would you cover your position? 
I would cover it anyway. I would co ver the position on the news. So once the news is out, the game 
is over for you. Right. That wa s the only reason I was short. 
OK, that answers the question too simply. Assume  you wanted to be short the tobacco stocks 
as a longer-term position and the market sh rugged off today's news and closed higher 
tomorrow. Would you cover then? 
It depends on my reasons. If I wanted to be s hort the tobacco companies because I felt tobacco 
consumption was going to decline much more than  presently perceived, it wouldn't matter that 
much. If the market rallied tomorrow, I would have  to take advantage of it and sell some more. 
So you wouldn't care if the market didn't react to the news the way it should have, as long as 
you felt the main reason fo r being short was still valid. 
Yes, but if the news was terrible and the stocks  were up, I would try to understand why. Sometimes 
the market has more information and the vari ant action is really telling you something. 
But haven't there been instances where your analysis was completely wrong? 
Sure. 
And you realized it somewhere down the road? 
Yes, and not necessarily so quickly. 
At this point, Steinhardt gets a phone call in which his side of the conversa tion is filled with non 
sequiturs and deliberate mumbling. He then explains to me his occasi onal habit of pl aying practical 
jokes on callers. 
For example, I get a call from a broker who I ha ven't spoken to for a long time. I swoosh some 
papers around and then say, "Buy 30,000 shares of  ZCU [mumbles another sentence]." Did you 
understand what I said? 
No [I laugh]. 
That is exactly right, bu t it sounded legitimate didn't it? Anyway, he calls me back, and I have my 
secretary tell him I'm in the bathroom. He calls b ack again, frantic because it is five minutes before 
the close, and I am still unavailable. Then at 3:58,1 call him back and say, "Haven't you done that 
order yet? What's the problem? Just do the damn thing!" Of course, he says, "I didn't catch the 
name of the stock." So I tell him [he mumbles another sentence] and ha ng up before he can say 
anything else.  100Your fund is often labeled as a hedge fund becaus e it trades very differently than a typical 
mutual fund. Could you elaborate on the meaning of a hedge fund. 
The A.W. Jones Group has been given credit for be ing the first hedge fund. Originally, the term 
referred to a precise concept, which essentially said the following: We in the world of money 
management do not have the ability to forecast tre nds in the stock market, which are functions of a 
host of variables that are largely beyond the consistent  ability of individuals to anticipate. But, what 
we as money managers can do, thro ugh careful analysis, is to make accurate judgments as to which 
companies are doing well versus those that are not. So, if one balanced long positions in stocks that 
were perceived to be relatively strong with short positions in st ocks expected to act poorly, the 
market risk would be totally eliminated. For exam ple, if you loved Ford and hated General Motors, 
and for every dollar long Ford you  were short a dollar of General Motors, you might lose on your 
shorts, but if your judgment wa s good, you would come out ahead. S o, the original concept of a 
hedge fund totally emphasized the ability to pick stocks. 
Does anyone still trade that way? 
No, today, the term hedge fund is somewhat of a misnomer. The term now refers to a limited 
partnership in which the general partner is typically paid on a performance basis, as opposed to 
more traditional money managers who are paid on assets managed. Typically, the manager of a 
hedge fund has a great deal more fl exibility than a traditional money manager, and that is really the 
key element. That flexibility could include being able to short stocks as  well as buy stocks, use 
options, futures, and so on. That is  what a hedge fund is in general terms, but the variations on the 
theme cover a very wide continuum. 
What happened to the original concept of a hedge fund? 
The flexibility of the hedge fund structure attr acted numerous young, aggressive entrepreneurs in 
the 1960s because it allowed them an opportunity to start their own business at an early age in a 
way that wasn't otherwise possible. Those were times  of great stocks with wonderful stories. There 
were quite a number of stoc ks showing terrific growth. 
The people that came into the hedge fund business we re not theoretical practit ioners of the idea of 
hedging, but were more interested in the idea of being their own bo sses, and having the flexibility 
to be long a lot of stock. Although they also had the flexibility of being short, they didn't use it in 
any serious way. The word hedge has a very specifi c meaning in the English language. In most of 
these hedge funds, you could serious ly ask, "Where is the hedge?" 
So they were hedge funds in name only? 
Correct. They wouldn't even call themselves hedge funds; they were embarrassed by the name. The 
term had a connotation of being shor t, and trading the short side had an anti-American ring to it. It 
was as if you were rooting for disa ster. So they started using the term [he a dopts a tone of mock 
pomposity] private partnership. 
Ironically, today, with the disi ntegration of the relatively sm ooth secular trends of the 1950s 
and 1960s, the concept of a true hedge fund may make more sense than it did in its early days. 
Why aren't there any practitioners of th e hedge fund concept in its pure form? 
Because it is a very restricting approach. The pr emise of being a dollar l ong and a dollar short in 
some related entity requires using a lot of dollars  ineffectively. How different are Ford and General 
Motors going to be? They are both  affected by the same macroeconomic  factors. If yo u have to put 
up some dollars for the long and some dollars fo r the short, you may be lucky to realize a 10 
percent difference over a period of a year—that is, assuming you are right. 
There is a group we are associated  with on the West Coast that sp ecializes exclusively in shorting 
stocks. The thought has been mentioned that maybe  they should neutralize their market exposure 
by being long an equal number of dollars in the st ock indexes as they are s hort in individual stocks, 
because what they bring to the part y is the special ability to pick sh orts. That is the closest thing to 
this concept I have heard recently, but they don't do it. 
How does your own fund fit into the hedge fund concept? 
It fits in the sense that shorting is used activel y. We always have some shorts. I also spend a good 
deal of my time thinking about net market expos ure and risk, and planning and adjusting for it. In  101the twenty-one years that I have been doing this, our overall exposure here has averaged about 40 
percent. 
You mean 40 percent net long? 
Yes. In contrast, I would doubt th at the most conservative of t ypical mutual funds has had an 
average exposure of less than 80 pe rcent during the last twenty years. 
On average, you have been about 40 percent ne t long. What range does that encompass? 
I remember being 15 or 20 percent net short at  one point, and, at anot her time, being over 100 
percent net long. 
So you have the flexibility of be ing net short as well as net long? 
Yes. One of the things I would emphasize about our  approach is its flexibility to shift market 
exposure so as to make it an exceptionally meaningful—sometimes  perhaps too meaningful—tool 
in our investment management arsenal. 
How do you determine your outlook for the general market directio n, since that is obviously a 
very critical element of your approach? 
It is really beyond definition, except to say that ther e are a host of variables, with some sometimes 
more important than others, and they change all the time. Having done it as long as I have gives me 
the opportunity to be 51 percent ri ght rather than 50 percent right. 
Does that imply that your main profitability comes from stock selection as opposed to net 
exposure adjustments for anticipated ch anges in the broad market direction? 
No, I was being a bit facetious. It is more than a 1 percent edge, but  it is not a big advantage like 
being right 80 percent of the ti me, or anything approaching that. 
Relatively speaking, how important is the bias  of the right market direction versus stock 
selection as a contributing factor to  your overall superior performance? 
As I look back on the past twenty-one years, ther e is no set pattern of successful activity. In some 
years, we did particularly well on the strength of a few well-chosen stocks. In other years, we did 
exceptionally well because we were on the right side of the market. For example, in 1973-1974, 
when the market went down enormously, we were  up substantially, largely because we were net 
short. There were other periods when the bulk of our money was made in bonds. I think there is a 
message in the fact that there is no real pattern:  Anyone who thinks he can formulate success in this 
racket is deluding himself, because it changes to o quickly. As soon as a formula is right for any 
length of time, its own success carries the weight of its inevitable failure. 
What made you sufficiently confident of lo wer stock prices to go net short in 1973-1974? 
The anticipation of a recession. 
Based on what? 
I felt that the higher inflation rates of that period would lead to higher interest rates, which, in turn, 
would slow down the economy. 
Were you negative on the stock market in th e period preceding the major 1982 bottom as 
well? 
Not as strongly. But in 1981 and 1982,1 made an  enormous amount of money by having a 
leveraged position in treasury notes. Although one coul dn't predict the end of the rise of interest 
rates timing-wise, it was clear that unless interest rates came down, other areas  had to be relatively 
unattractive. When you could ge t 14 percent in long-term treasur y securities, in order to be 
competitive, stocks had to sell so much lower than they were selling at that it wasn't even worth 
focusing on which stocks to buy—although you might focus on the short side . What was unique in 
that period was the inevitability of  a turn in interest rates in order for anything else to be 
worthwhile; it was simply a matter of timing that turn . In contrast to most ot her periods, this period 
had a clear unidirectional message: U.S. Treas ury fixed income securities were by far the 
quintessential value of the time. 
Anyone with any sense of contrari an mentality had to look at inte rest rates in the early 1980s as 
presenting a potentially great opportunity. You kne w the Fed would have to ease as soon as  102business started to run into trouble. In addition, we had already seen an important topping in the 
rate of inflation. 
So, some of the pieces of the puzzle were already in place? 
Yes, and that is as much as you can hope for, be cause when they are all in  place, it is too late. 
You mention a contrarian mentality, but that type  of thinking could have justified trying to 
pick a top at much lower rates. 
Absolutely. People think that being a contrarian implies victory. After all, what is a contrarian but 
someone that goes against the crowd. It is almost  a cliche that the crowd is always wrong—so the 
guy who stands against the crowd must always be right. Well, lif e doesn't work that way. There 
were plenty of contrarians who bought bonds when interest rates we nt to 8 percent for the first 
time, and 9 percent, and 10 percent. There was a great deal of money lost by people buying bonds 
at what were then all-time high yields. 
There is a very important differe nce between being a theoretical c ontrarian and dealing with it in 
practical terms. In order to win as a contraria n, you need the right timing and you have to put on a 
position in the appropriate size. If  you do it too small, it's not meaningful; if you do it too big, you 
can get wiped out if your timing is slightly off. The process requires courage, commitment, and an 
understanding of your own psychology. 
I assume that you probably had the market r un against you for quite a while in that trade. 
Right, it did. It was a very painful period, because as far as most of my i nvestors were concerned, I 
was an equity investor. What did I know about bonds? Who was I to contradict Henry Kaufman 
who was telling the world that in terest rates were going to th e moon? Not only was I doing 
something that was different than in the past, which always raises the antennas of investors—
particularly those with an in stitutional mentality—but I was doing it in an enormous size. 
Were you leveraged more than 100 percent on your position? 
Yes, at one point I had three to four times the fi rm's capital in five-year maturities. In stocks, you 
have a policeman who tells you how much you can speculate: it is called margin requirements. But 
in treasuries, you can finance as much as 98 pe rcent of your purchases, de pending on maturity, so 
there is no real constraint. 
How long was the period between when you st arted buying treasuries and the market bottom 
[interest rate peak]? 
I started buying in the spri ng of!981,andl think treasuries bottomed on September 30,1981. 
How much did rates move against you in that first half year? 
I don't recall, but rates went up enough to be pain ful, especially given the size of my position. 
Up until this time, you had primarily been a stock trader. Here on your first major foray in 
treasuries, you started out by incurring substa ntial losses. Didn't you have periods of self-
doubt? 
All the time. The summer of 1981 was the worst experience of my busine ss life. A number of 
thoughtful, intelligent investors were really very unhappy with what I was doing—and I wasn't so 
sure myself. 
Did you ever come close to saying, "Maybe I am wrong," and liquidating, or at least 
decreasing, your position? 
No, never. 
One of your basic principles seem s to be that as long as you  believe you are fundamentally 
right, you will stay with a position. Have there been any exceptions—that  is, markets in which 
you didn't change your fundamental vi ew, but the loss just got too big? 
There have been some situations when I was sh ort and simply didn't have enough courage to hang 
in with the full-boat of the position. That was part icularly true in 1972, at the height of the "Nifty-
Fifty" phenomenon. With the exception of Octobe r 1987, that was probably the worst period in my 
investment life. At the time, th ere was a theory that as long as  a company continued to sustain 
substantially above-average secula r growth, it didn't matter how mu ch you paid for it. Many growth  103stocks traded at multiples that were just crazy. We  went short Polaroid when it was selling at sixty 
times earnings, which we thought was absurd; it th en went to seventy times earnings. The market 
seemed to lose track of reality, and we found ourselves asking, "What is the difference between 
forty times earnings and eighty times earnings?"  By putting a different number on the secular 
growth rate estimate, you could justify almost a ny multiple That is how people were thinking in 
those days. 
So you backed off during that period? 
At times we did, because we were losing a lot of money. 
Did that prove to be the right move, because stoc ks eventually went to much higher multiples, 
or would you have been bett er off if you had held on? 
In hindsight, in almost all cases, I woul d have been better off sticking it out. 
You mentioned that October 1987 was one of th e worst market experi ences in your career. 
Obviously, you had lots of company. But I find it  surprising, you being such a contrarian. I 
wouldn't have expected you to be heavily long  in a year with such bullish euphoria. What 
happened? 
Actually, in the spring  of 1987,1 wrote a letter to my investors stati ng the reasons why I was 
cautious and substantially reducing my exposure in the market. Having done that, I kept thinking 
about why the market was trading at a level that was too high by historic standards I came to the 
conclusion that the quintessential issue was a un ique combination of phenomena occurring in the 
American equity markets—a substantial con tinuous reduction in the amount of equities 
outstanding, coinciding with a more  liberal attitude toward debt. As long as banks were comfort-
able lending money, the junk bond market was good, and corporate managers saw repurchasing 
their shares as the right thing to  do, I felt there would be an unusua l upward bias to  equity prices. 
That to me was the single most important reason in the seeming overvaluation of stocks that existed 
through most of 1987. 
Therefore, the important question was: What was goi ng to change this situation? The answer was a 
recession. And whenever that recession would come , its impact would be horrendous because the 
government didn't have the flexibil ity to fight it since they had de viatsd from a countercyclical 
fiscal policy during the expansion phase. But dur ing the fall of 1987, not only was the economy not 
weakening, it was strengthening—so mu ch so that the Fed tightened. 
What I didn't anticipate was that less-than-drama tic events could have as large an impact on the 
market as they did. What was the real importance of  the Fed tightening? Ordinarily, that might have 
created a 100- or 200-point decline in the stock mark et, but not a 500-point decline. In the light of 
history, what was the significance  of Treasury Secretary Baker's criticism of Germany? It was 
merely a disagreement as to the proper valua tion of currencies—hardly a unique event. In 
retrospect, what happened to the real world after October 19? Almo st nothing. So, in some sense, 
you have to conclude that this problem was internal  to the market; it wasn't that the market was 
forecasting an imminent financial debacle or great recession. 
How then do you explain the extreme nature of the October 19 price break? 
The problem that led to the Octo ber 19 collapse was the combina tion of relatively modest real 
world changes and an inability of the markets' mech anism to deal with the institutional changes that 
occurred mostly during the 1980s. The elements  of stability—the indi vidual investor and the 
specialist system—had been grea tly reduced in importance. 
Do you believe portfolio insurance exacerbated the decline? [P ortfolio insurance is the 
systematic sale of stock index fu tures to reduce the risk exposure in a stock portfolio as prices 
decline. See Appendix 1 for more detail.] 
That was one of the new elements. On one hand, you had a reduction in the elements of stability. 
On the other hand, you had the cr eations of the 1980s—portfolio in surance, program trading, and 
global asset allocation—which tended to exert a unidirectional impact. By that, I mean that 
participants in these strategies tend to be buyers and sellers at th e same time. The stock market was 
not prepared to handle it.  104Where were you, position wise, coming in on October 19? 
I came in very much long exposed—80 to 90 per cent—and I increased my exposure during the day. 
Why? Were you still bullish? 
My increasing exposure was strictly a contrarian trade in the sense that when the markets have an 
enormous move, most of the time, it is right to take the view that there is a lot of emotionalism and 
extremism in that move. If you can maintain a bit of distance from the em otionalism, you tend to do 
well. So my buying that day is what I would have done on any 300-, 400-, or 500-point down day. 
Did you stay with your long position? 
No, I reduced it throughout the next two months. The magnit ude of the decline and the 
extraordinary change in confidence that it engender ed affected me as well.  I thought it wa s better to 
sit back and rethink the situation with a lot of cash rather than try to hang in. 
Did you think that your basic premise for being long was no longer valid? 
I thought that I had underestimated the impact of th e forces that had diminished market stability. 
What was your percentage loss during October 1987? 
I was down over 20 percent for the month. 
As you look back on the October 1987 experien ce, are there mistakes that you believe you 
learned from? 
There is a very good investor I speak to frequently  who said, "All I bring to  the party is twenty-
eight years of mistakes." I really  believe he is right. When you make a mistake, there is some 
subconscious phenomenon that makes it less likely for you to make that same mistake again. One 
of the advantages of trading the way I do—being a long-term investor, short- term trader, individual 
stock selector, market timer, sector analyst—is that I have made so ma ny decisions and mistakes 
that it has made me wise be yond my years as an investor. 
The typical mutual fund adheres to a buy-and-ho ld approach. Do you think that concept is 
basically a flawed strategy? 
Yes, although flawed isn't quite the word I would use. I would say it is too limiting a strategy. The 
objective of participating in the long-term growth of American e quities, willing to suffer through 
those periods when equities decline, is fine, but it leaves so much on the table in terms of potential 
professional management. It is an incomplete strategy. 
Yet, the vast majority of all funds fall into that category. 
I guess so, but less than before. More and more people are paying attention to market timing, not 
that they are necessarily qualified to do it terribly  well, but because they have come to recognize 
what a buy-and-hold approach means. When I was a kid, it was common advi ce to buy a stock, put 
it in a vault, and forget about it. You don't hear  that sort of concept anymore. We have lost 
confidence in the long term. 
Do you think the mutual fund industry is going to change? 
The mutual fund industry is certainly sensitive e nough to the whims of the investing public to find 
products that will meet contemporary needs. 
How do you handle a losing period? 
As is true for so many other questio ns in this business, there is no pat answer or formula. There is 
nothing that can be articulated  precisely enough to lead othe rs in a certain direction. 
In other words, one losing period may be suffi ciently different from anot her so that, even for 
yourself, there may be no gen eral wisdom that applies. 
Correct. 
How did you get started as a fund trader? 
When I first got into this business in the late 1960s, I only had an analytical background. I was an 
agricultural equipment and cyclical goods analyst at Loeb Rhoa des. My business was started with 
two other fellows who were also analysts. As ou r business grew, trading became more important. I 
became the trader for the firm, having had very little trading background.  105If you had very little experience,  why did you become the trader? 
I probably wasn't as good an analyst as the other two. 
Even in those early years, you did very well as  a trader. How do you think you managed that 
without benefit of experience? 
My father has been a gambler all his life. Although I can't remotely justify it, I feel there is an 
element of gambling in this business. Ma ybe I got that talent from my father. 
You have traded the stock market for over twen ty years. Have you noticed any significant 
changes during that time? 
The amount of intellectual power on  the trading desks twenty year s ago was minimal compared to 
today. The institutional traders were typically kids from Brookl yn, who could hardly speak the 
language, made a minimum amount of money, and had very little discretion. So  when I first started 
trading, it was like taking candy from a baby. 
I remember once a trader needed to sell 700,000 shar es of Penn Central. At the time, the stock was 
already in Chapter 11. The last trade was at 7, and the seller didn't both er to check the board. I 
bought 700,000 shares at 6'/ 8. The seller was relieved to sell that amount of stock at less than a 
dollar under the last trade. Meanwhile, I turned around and sold the 700,000 shares at 61.1 could 
have sold three times that amount at that price. I made a half million dollars on that trade, and it 
took me all of twelve seconds. 
How long did that environment last? 
Until the consolidated tape in 1975. Now there is a lot more competition; the people on the trading 
desks are much brighter. Another ch ange is that retail buyers and sell ers have diminish ed greatly in 
importance. The market has become institutiona lized. Individuals buy stock through mutual funds. 
Brokerage firms don't sell customers stocks so mu ch as they sell those horrible mutual funds and 
other awful things they call "financial products." 
Perhaps the most important change is that the wo rld has become much more  short term oriented. 
All sorts of people who used to be investors are now traders. The in stitutions now define 
themselves as enterprises whose goal is to achiev e the highest rate of return, when they used to 
define themselves as long-term investors. People's confidence in their ability to predict secular 
trends has greatly diminished. In 1967, it would be  typical to see a report by a brokerage firm 
estimating McDonalds' per share earnings up to the year 2000. Those people thought they could 
estimate long-term earnings because companies were growing in a stable and predictable way. 
They believed in America and steady growth. Toda y, stocks don't lend themselves to the same type 
of secular analysis. 
The implication of secular growth trend analysis  not having worked in the 1970s and 1980s relates 
to the question of trading. In th e 1950s and 1960s, the heroes were  the long-term investors; today, 
the heroes are the wise guys. There are people lik e Goldsmith, who lauds the virtues of capitalism. 
He talks about "what I did for Goodyear." What di d he do for Goodyear? He was in there for seven 
months, made eight zilli on dollars for himself, and left the ma nagement after taking greenmail. He 
talks about what he did for Goodyear, because he is uncomfortable and has to somehow associate 
himself with the capitalist process. He and th ese other people have to bitch and moan about 
management, but they don't know their ass from their elbow about running companies. With the 
breakdown of certain laws, people are allowed to do things they weren't allowed to do before. 
What laws are you referring to? 
The Justice Department's reinterpretation of take over laws; the definition of  what is and is not 
monopolistic. 
What would be the most important ad vice you could give to the layman? 
One of the allures of this business is that sometim es the greatest ignoramus can do very well. That 
is unfortunate because it create s the impression that you don't necessa rily need any professionalism 
to do well, and that is a great trap. So the majo r advice I would give any body is: Recognize that this 
is a very competitive business, and that when yo u decide to buy or sell a stock, you are competing 
with people who have devoted a good portion of th eir lives to this same  endeavor. In many in-
stances, these professionals are on the opposite side of your trades and, on balance, they are going  106to beat you. 
Is the implicit message that, most  of the time, the novice trader would be better off having his 
money professionally managed? 
The term professionally managed implies a cred it I am not sure I w ould give the average 
professional in this business. My point is that you should have a good reason to assume that you are 
going to achieve a significantly s uperior return for investing in stocks. If you can get 9 percent or 
10 percent by investing in T-bonds and 7 percent or  8 percent by investing in  T-bills, what should 
you get in stocks to offset the incremental risk ? Probably something much higher. You have to 
decide what that number should be, and whethe r you have a realistic ch ance of achieving it. 
Don't underestimate the difficulty of the game. 
Right, and forget the shibboleth th at stocks are going to give you a higher rate of return because 
they are more risky. That is not true. They are more  risky; therefore, you have to be convinced that 
you are going to get a higher rate of return in order to play the game. Don't assume that by 
investing in some mutual fund, you are goi ng to get a higher rate of return. 
Isn't that true, though? Historically, hasn't the stock market significan tly beat interest rate 
returns? 
True, but there is a lot of statistical mumbo jumbo involved. Average return ca lculations depend 
heavily on the starting date. If you start in 1968 or  1972, for example, the numbers look a lot less 
appealing. 
What are the elements of good trading? 
Good trading is a peculiar balance between the convict ion to follow your ideas and the flexibility to 
recognize when you have made a mistake. You need to believe in something, but at the same time, 
you are going to be wrong a cons iderable number of times. The balance between confidence and 
humility is best learned through extensive experi ence and mistakes. There should be a respect for 
the person on the other side of the trade. Always ask yourself: Why does he want to sell? What 
does he know that I don't? Finally, you have to be intellectually honest with yourself and others. In 
my judgment, all great trad ers are seekers of truth. 
Steinhardt's variant perception is basically a co ntrarian approach. But you can't be a successful 
contrarian by just using sentiment survey numbe rs or other measures of bullish consensus. The 
markets don't pay off that easily. Although sentiment is always very bullish at tops and very bearish 
at bottoms, unfortunately, extreme bullish and bearish readings are also characteristic of extended 
trends. The trick is not being a co ntrarian, but being a contrarian at  the right time. Such judgments 
cannot be made on the basis of simple formulae. The successful contrarian needs to be able to filter 
out the true opportunities. Steinhardt's filters are a combination of a keen sense of fundamentals 
and market timing. 
Flexibility is another essential key to Steinhardt's extremely fa vorable return/risk performance 
characteristics. This flexibility is demonstrated by the equal ease at which he goes short or long, as 
well as his willingness to trade markets other than  stocks when warranted by his perception of the 
fundamentals. "The more things you bring to the table—shorting, hedging, participation in bond 
markets, futures market trading, and so on—the better off you are," he says. 
One trait I have noticed among a number of the great  traders is their willi ngness and ability to take 
on a particularly large position when they percei ve a major trading opportunity. The nerve and skill 
required to step on the accelerator at  the right time is certainly one of the elements that separates 
good traders from exceptional trader s. Steinhardt's heavy position in treasury notes  during 1981 and 
1982 is a perfect example of this characteristic. 
Conviction is probably an important quality for a ny trader, but it is essent ial to the contrarian 
trader. Steinhardt has repeatedly  demonstrated amazing resolve in maintaining large positions 
during difficult times, as long as he was convinced  he was still right. Witness his conviction in 
staying with his treasury note position during the six-month climax in interest rates in 1981, 
remaining immune not only to the market move agains t him, but also to the psychological pressures 
of complaining investors who questioned his sudde n transition into treasuries after a career as a 
stock trader. Throughout it all, Steinhardt held on, and even built his position, because he remained  107convinced that he was right. W ithout his strong sense of convi ction, the world probably would 
never have heard of Michael Steinhardt. 
Steinhardt also stresses that there are no absolu te formulae or fixed patterns. The markets are 
always changing, and the successful trader needs to  adapt to these changes. In Steinhardt's view, 
traders who try to find fixed approaches w ill be doomed to failure sooner or later. 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  108William O'Neil-The Art of Stock Selection 
William O'Neil is an unreserved optimist and ebullient fan of the American economic system and 
its possibilities. O'Neil says, "G reat opportunities o ccur every year in America. Get yourself 
prepared and go for it. You will find that little  acorns can grow into giant oaks. Anything is 
possible with persistence and hard work. It can be done, and your own determination to succeed is 
the most important element." 
O'Neil is living proof of his own words: a cla ssic American success story. Born in Oklahoma 
during the lean Great Depression years and raised in  Texas, he went on to build dual fortunes as 
both an immensely profitable investor and a highly successful businessman. 
O'Neil began his financial career  as a stockbroker for Hayden, St one and Company in 1958. It was 
there that he first began the research that led to the formulation of the key elements of his 
investment strategy. O'Neil's trading concepts prove d remarkably effective from the start. During 
1962-63, by pyramiding the profits in three excep tional back-to-back trad es—short Korvette, long 
Chrysler, and long Syntex—he managed to pa rlay an initial $5,000 investment into $200,000. 
In 1964, O'Neil used his investment winnings to buy a seat on the New York Stock Exchange and 
to form William O'Neil and Co., an institutional research brokerage firm. His firm was a leader in 
offering comprehensive computerized stock market in formation and today is one of the most highly 
respected securities research firms in the count ry. William O'Neil and Co. services more than 500 
major institutional accounts and 28,000 individual subscribers to their Daily Graphs charting 
service. The firm's data base contains 120 different statistics on each of 7,500 securities. 
In what was certainly his boldest  endeavor, in 1983, O'Neil launched Investor's Daily in direct 
competition with the Wall Street Journal. He financed the newspaper with his own funds, knowing 
that it would be many years before he could hope to break even. Skeptics abounded when the paper 
began with a press run under 30,000 in 1984, compared to over two million for the Wall Street 
Journal. By mid-1988, Investor's Daily's subscribership had expanded to over 110,000, and the 
growth in circulation was accelerating. The es timated breakeven point of 200,000 subscribers no 
longer seems far-fetched. O'Neil believes Investor's Daily can eventually grow  to 800,000 readers. 
His unflagging confidence in the paper stems from the fact that Investor's Daily' s financial tables 
contain statistical information unavailable anywhe re else— earnings per share (EPS) rank, relative 
strength, and volume percent ch ange. (These measures are di scussed in the interview.) 
In 1988, O'Neil combined his concepts in the book How to Make Money in Stocks, published by 
McGraw-Hill. The book combines clarity and brevity  with excellent and very specific trading 
advice. It was the best-selli ng investment book of the year. 
O'Neil's various business ventures have not impede d his performance as a virtuoso stock investor. 
During the past ten years, O'Ne il has averaged over a 40 per cent profit annually on his stock 
investments. Some of his biggest winners were the Canadian oils during the 1970s and Pic'n'Save 
and Price Co. during the late 1970s and early 1980s . Perhaps O'Neil's most famous market calls 
were two full-page Wall Street Journal ads heralding imminent major bull markets. The timing of 
these ads could hardly have been better: March 1978 and February 1982. 
William O'Neil and Company is a no-frills operation. Rarely have I seen a more crowded office 
environment. O'Neil, however, does not single himsel f out for any special priv ileges. In what must 
surely be a rarity among chief executive officers,  he shares his office with two other employees. 
O'Neil impressed me as being articulate, confid ent, opinionated, and very bullish on America. 
I think it would be fair to describe your st ock investment approach as individualistic and 
original. Where did you first develop your trading ideas? 
I went through the same process that most people do. I subscribed to a few investment letters and 
most of them didn't do too well. I found that theori es like buying low-priced stocks or stocks with 
low price/earnings (P/E) ra tios were not very sound. 
When did you first find an approach that worked? 
Back in 1959,1 did a study of the people that were doing very well in the market. At that time, the 
Dreyfus fund was a very small fund, managing onl y about $15 million. Jack Dreyfus, who managed 
the fund, was doubling the results of all of his compe titors. So I got copies of their prospectus and  109quarterly reports and plotted on charts precisely where they had purchased each of their stocks. 
There were over 100 of these securities and when I laid them out on a table, I made my first real 
discovery: Not some, not most, but every single st ock had been bought when it went to a new high 
price. 
So the first thing I learned about how to get superi or performance is not to buy stocks that are near 
their lows, but to buy stocks that are coming out of broad bases and begi nning to make new highs 
relative to the preceding price base . You are trying to find the begi nning of a major move so that 
you don't waste six or nine months sitti ng in a stock that is going nowhere. 
I studied the stocks that were big winners in past years and tried to find the characteristics they had 
in common before they became major successes. I didn't just limit myself to preconceived notions 
like P/E ratios; I examined a lot of variables to develop a model based on how the real world 
worked. 
Can you describe this model for picking winning stocks? 
I use the easy-to-remember acronym CANSLIM. Each letter of this name represents one of the 
seven chief characteristics of th e all-time great winning stocks durin g their early developing stages, 
just before they made huge advances. 
The "C" stands for current earnings per share. The best performing stocks showed a 70 percent 
average increase in earnings for the current qua rter over the same quarter in the prior year before 
they began their major advance. I am continuall y amazed by how many individual investors, and 
even pension fund managers, buy  common stocks with unchange d or lower current quarter 
earnings. There is absolutely no re ason for a stock to go up if the current earnings are poor. If, as 
our research demonstrated, the best  stocks had large profit increases  before they advanced rapidly 
in price, why should anybody settle for mediocre ear nings? So, our first basic rule in stock selection 
is that quarterly earnings per share should be up by at least 20 to 50 percent year to year. 
The "A" in our formula stands for annual earnings  per share. In our studi es, the prior five-year 
average annual compounded earnings growth rate of outstanding performing stocks at their early 
emerging stage was 24 percent. Ideally, each year 's earnings per share should show an increase 
over the prior year's earnings. 
It is a unique combination of bot h strong current earnings and high average earnings growth that 
creates a superb stock. The EPS rank, which is published in lnvestor's Daily, combines a stock's 
percent earnings increase  during the past two quarters with the past five-year average percent 
earnings and compares that figure to every other stock we cover. An EPS rank of 95 means that a 
company's current and five-year historical earn ings have outperformed 95 percent of all other 
companies. 
The "N" in our formula stands fo r something new. The "new" can be a new product or service, a 
change in the industry, or new management. In  our research we found that 95 percent of the 
greatest winners had something new that fell within  these categories. The "new" also refers to a 
new high price for the stock. In our seminars we find that 98 percent of investors are unwilling to 
buy a stock at a new high. Yet, it is one of the great  paradoxes of the stock market that what seems 
too high usually goes higher and what seems too low usually goes lower. 
The "S" in the formula stands for shares outsta nding. Ninety-five percen t of the stocks that 
performed best in our studies had less than twen ty-five million shares of capitalization during the 
period when they had thei r best performance. The average capita lization of all of these stocks was 
11.8 million shares, while the median figure wa s only 4.6 million. Many institutional investors 
handicap themselves by restricting their purchases to only large-capitalization companies. By doing 
so, they automatically eliminate some of the best growth companies. 
The "L" in our formula stands for leader or laggard. The 500 best-performing stocks during the 
1953-1985 period had an average relative strength of 87 before their major price increase actually 
began. [The relative strength measur es a stock' s price performance during the past twelve months 
compared to all other stocks. For example, a rela tive strength of 80 would mean that the given 
stock outperformed 80 percent of all other stocks dur ing the past year.] So, another basic rule in 
stock selection is to pick the leading stocks—the ones with th e high relative strength values—and 
avoid the laggard stocks. I tend to restrict purcha ses to companies with relative strength ranks 
above 80.  110The "I" in the formula stands for institutional s ponsorship. The institutional buyers are by far the 
largest source of demand for stocks. Leading stoc ks usually have institutional backing. However, 
although some institutional sponsorship is desired, excessive sponsorship is not, because it would 
be a source of large selling if a nything went wrong with the company or the market in general. This 
is why the most widely owned inst itutional stocks can be poor perf ormers. By the time a company's 
performance is so obvious that al most all institutions own a stock, it is probably too late to buy. 
The "M" in our formula stands for market. Three out of four stocks will go in  the same direction as 
a significant move in the market averages. That is  why you need to learn how to interpret price and 
volume on a daily basis for signs that the market has topped. 
At any given time, less than 2 percent of the st ocks in the entire mark et will fit the CANSLIM 
formula. The formula is deliberately restrictive b ecause you want to pick only the very best. If you 
were recruiting players for a baseball team, woul d you pick an entire lineup of .200 hitters, or 
would you try to get as many .300 hitters as possible? 
Since you use such a restrictive selection proce ss, do you have a high  percentage of winning 
trades? 
I guess over the years, about two- thirds of my stock purchases we re actually closed at a profit. 
However, I have found that only one  or two stocks of every ten I ha ve bought have tu rned out to be 
truly outstanding. 
Wouldn't most of the indicato rs in your CANSLIM formula, such  as EPS, pick up a stock 
before it goes to new highs? Why not just buy the stock when it is still forming a base instead 
of waiting for it to go to a new high? 
You don't want to anticipate a breakout from a ba se because a stock may never break out. You can 
buy too soon as well as too late. Th e idea is to buy when there is the least proba bility of a loss. If 
you buy within the base, the stock will frequently fluctuate 10 or 15 percent in normal trading 
action, and it is very easy to get shaken out of the position. But if I buy at exactly the right time, the 
stock is usually not going to go down to  my maximum 7 percent stop-loss point. 
You have stated that the superior stocks ha ve high relative strength figures—80 or higher. 
Although high relative strength is good, is there such a thing as it being too high? In other 
words, might a relative strength of 99 indicate  that the stock is overextended and vulnerable 
to a sharp correction? 
You have to look at a chart to make that determ ination. The key point is not how high the relative 
strength is, but rather how far the stock is ex tended beyond its most recent price base. You buy 
stocks that have a high relative strength if they  are just beginning to emerge from a sound base-
building period. However, I would generally not buy a stock with a high re lative strength that is 
already more than 10 percent beyond its prior price base. 
The "M" in the CANSLIM formula makes sense since few stocks can buck a general bear 
market. However, that rule sounds easier in theory than in practice. After a ll, how do you tell 
the difference between a market top a nd a normal bull market correction? 
Top formations in the market averages occur in only one of two ways. First, the average moves up 
to a new high, but does so on low volume. This tell s you that the demand for stocks is poor at that 
point and that the rally is vulnerable. Second, vol ume surges for several days, but there is very 
little, if any, upside price progress as measured by market closes. In this latter case, there may not 
be a pickup in volume when the market initially tops, since the distribution has taken place on the 
way up. 
Another way to determine the direct ion of the general market is to  focus on how the leading stocks 
are performing. If the stocks that have been leading the bull mark et start breaking down, that is a 
major sign the market has topped. Another importa nt factor to watch is  the Federal Reserve 
discount rate. Usually, after the Fed raises the rate two or three times , the market runs into trouble. 
The daily advance/decline line is sometimes a useful indicator to watch for signs of  a market top. 
[The advance/decline line illustrates the differen ce between the total number of New York Stock 
Exchange stocks advancing each day versus the nu mber declining.] Frequently, the advance/decline 
line will lag behind the market averages and fail to  penetrate prior peaks af ter the averages reach  111new highs. This indicates that fewer stocks are participating in the market advance. 
When you believe that the general market ha s entered a bearish phase, would you advise 
going short rather than m erely liquidating longs? 
I don't normally advise people to sell short unless th ey are professional traders. Selling short is 
quite tricky. I myself have only ma de significant profits on the shor t side of two of the last nine 
bear markets. 
A stock should never be sold short because its pri ce looks too high. The idea is not to sell short at 
the top, but at the right time. Short selling of i ndividual stocks should only be considered after the 
general market shows signs of a top. The best chart pattern to short is one in which a stock breaks 
out on the upside of its third or fourth base and then fails. The stock should be breaking down 
toward the low end of its previ ous base pattern on increased volum e. After the first serious price 
break below the base, there will usually be several pullback attempts. The prior base will now 
provide an area of overhead  supply, as all investor s who bought in that zone  will be losing money, 
and a number of them will be eager to get out near breakeven. Therefore, pullbacks to failed price 
bases also provide good timing for short sales. 
Does the element of unlimited risk pres ent any special problem in short selling? 
No, because I never take unlimited risk. If a shor t position goes against me, I will be out after the 
first 6 or 7 percent loss. Before you sell any stoc k short, you should decide the price at which you 
will cover that short position if a loss occurs. 
Besides the CANSLIM formula, whic h is critical to you r stock selection process, risk control 
obviously plays an important role in your ov erall strategy. Can you ta lk a little bit more 
about that element of trading? 
My philosophy is that all stocks are bad. There are no good stoc ks unless they go up in price. If 
they go down instead, you have to cut your losses fast. The secret for winning in the stock market 
does not include being right all the time. In fact , you should be able to win even if you are right 
only half the time. The key is to lose the l east amount of money possi ble when you are wrong. I 
make it a rule never to lose more than a maximum of 7 percent on any stock I buy. If a stock drops 
7 percent below my purchase pri ce, I will automatica lly sell it at the market—no second-guessing, 
no hesitation. 
Some people say, "I can't sell that stock because I'd be taking a loss. " If the stock is below the price 
you paid for it, selling doesn't give you the loss; you already have it. Letting losses run is the most 
serious mistake made by most investors. The p ublic doesn't really und erstand the philosophy of 
cutting losses quickly. If you don't ha ve a rule like cutting a loss at 7 percent, then in bear markets 
like 1973-74, you can lose 70 or 80 percent on your  holdings. I have seen people go bankrupt in 
that type of situation. If you ar en't willing to cut your losses short, then you probably should not 
buy stocks. Would you drive your car without brakes? 
In my book, I repeat a story told by Fred C. Kelly, the author of Why You Win or Lose, that 
provides the best example I know of how the typi cal investor procrastinates when it comes to 
making a selling decision. A man has rigged up a turkey  trap with a trail of corn leading into a big 
box with a hinged door. The man holds a long piece of twine, connected to th e door, that he can use 
to pull the door shut once enough turkeys have wa ndered into the box. However, once he shuts the 
door, he can't open it again wit hout going back to the box, whic h would scare away any turkeys 
lurking on the outside. 
One day, he had a dozen turkeys in his box. Then one walked out, leaving eleven. "I should have 
pulled the string when there were twelve inside," he thought, "but maybe if I wait, he will walk 
back in." While he was waiting fo r his twelfth turkey to return, two more turkeys walked out. "I 
should have been satisfied with th e eleven," he thought. "If just one of them walks back, I will pull 
the string." While he was waiting, three more turk eys walked out. Eventual ly, he was left empty-
handed. His problem was that he couldn't give up th e idea that some of the original turkeys would 
return. This is the attitude of the typical investor  who can't bring himself to sell at a loss. He keeps 
expecting the stock to recover. The moral is: To reduce your stock mark et risk, stop counting 
turkeys.  112OK, you use your CANSLIM methodology for sele cting stocks, and your 7 percent rule for 
getting out if you are wrong. How do you decide  when to liquidate a winning stock position? 
First, you should hold a stoc k as long as it is performing properl y. Jesse Livermore said, "It is never 
your thinking that makes big money, it's the si tting." Second, you have to realize that you will 
never sell the exact top. Therefore,  it is ridiculous to  kick yourself when a stock goes higher after 
you sell. The goal is to make substantial profits  on your stocks and not be upset if the price 
continues to advan ce after you get out. 
Your writings express disdain for a number of factors that many people consider important, 
including P/E ratios, dividends, diversificatio n, and overbought/oversold indicators. Could 
you explain what you think is wrong with the conventional wisdom regarding these subjects. 
Let's start with P/E ratios. 
To say that a stock is undervalue d because it is selli ng at a low P/E ratio is nonsense. In our 
research, we found there was a very low correlati on between the P/E ratio and the best-performing 
stocks. Some of these stocks had P/E ratios of 10 when they started their ma jor advance; others had 
P/E ratios of 50. During the thir ty-three years in our survey pe riod [1953-1985], th e average P/E 
ratio for the best-performing stocks at their earl y emerging stage was 20, compared to an average 
P/E ratio of 15 for the Dow Jones Average during the same time. At the end of their expansion 
phase, these stocks had an average P/E ratio of a pproximately 45. This means that if, in the past, 
you were not willing to buy stocks with above-average P/Es, you auto matically eliminated most of 
the best-performing securities. 
A common mistake a lot of investors make is to  buy a stock solely becau se the P/E ratio looks 
cheap. There is usually a very good reason why a P/E ratio is low. Many years ago, when I was first 
beginning to study the market, I bought  Northrop at four times earnings  and watched in disbelief as 
the stock eventually declin ed to two times earnings. 
Another common mistake is selling stocks with high P/E ratios. I still remember in 1962 when an 
investor barged into my friend' s brokerage office, declaring in  a loud voice that Xerox was 
drastically overpriced because it  was selling at fifty times earn ings. He went short at $88. Xerox 
eventually went to $1,300, adjusting for stock splits. 
Your thoughts on dividends? 
There is no correlation between divi dends and a stock's performance, hi fact, the more a company 
pays in dividends, the weaker their posture becaus e they may have to pay high interest rates to 
replace funds paid ou t in dividends. It is naiv e to hold stocks that are going down because they pay 
dividends. If you are getting a 4 percent dividend and the stock goes down 25 percent, your net 
yield is a 21 percent loss. 
How about overbought/oversold indicators? 
I rarely pay any attention to overbought/oversold indicators. I once hired a well-known professional 
who specialized in such technical indicators. At the very point during the 1969 market break when I 
was trying to convince portfolio managers to liquida te stocks and move to cash, he was telling them 
it was too late to sell because his indicators said the market was very overs old. Once his indicators 
were oversold, the market break really accelerated. 
The final item on my list of your most pr ominent conventional wisdom targets is 
diversification. 
Diversification is a hedge for i gnorance. I think you are much bett er off owning a few stocks and 
knowing a great deal about them. By being very selective, you increase your chances of picking 
superior performers. You can also  watch those stocks much more carefully, which is important in 
controlling risk. 
How many issues would you advise a typi cal investor to hold at any one time? 
For an investor with $5,000, one or two; $10,000, three or four; $25,000, four or five; $50,000, five 
or six; and $100,000 or more, six or seven. 
Aside from the subjects we have just discussed, is there anythi ng else you consider a major 
public misconception?  113Most investors think that char ts are hocus-pocus. Only about 5 to 10 percent of investors 
understand charts. Even a lot of pr ofessionals are totally ignorant about charts. Just as a doctor 
would be foolish not to use X-rays  and EKGs, investors would be f oolish not to use charts. Charts 
provide valuable information about what is going on that cannot be obtained easily any other way. 
They allow you to follow a huge number of di fferent stocks in an organized manner. 
Earlier, you talked about using volume as a clue that the market averages were topping. Do 
you also use volume as an indica tor in trading individual stocks? 
The volume in a stock is a measure of supply and demand. When a stock is beginning to move into 
new high ground, volume should increase by at least 50 percent over the average daily volume in 
recent months. High volume at a key point is an extrao rdinarily valuable tip-off that a stock is ready 
to move. 
Volume can also be used in a reverse manner. When  prices enter a consolidation after an advance, 
volume should dry up very substantially. In other wo rds, there should be very little selling coming 
into the market. During a consolidation, d eclining volume is gene rally constructive. 
How do you handle a losing streak? 
If you hit a losing streak, and it is not because what you are doing is wrong, that tells you the whole 
market may be going bad. If you have fi ve or six straight losses, you want  to pull back to see if it is 
time to start moving into cash. 
The "M" in your CANSLIM formula emphasize s the importance of being out of the 
market—at least on the long side—during majo r bear phases. Since most mutual funds, by 
their very structure, remain he avily invested in stocks throughout both bull and bear 
markets, does this imply that you belie ve mutual funds are a poor investment? 
This is going to surprise you. I think mutual funds  are an absolutely outstanding way to invest. I 
believe that every person should own their own home, own real esta te, and have an individual stock 
account or own mutual funds. Those are the only wa ys you can make any substantial income above 
your salary. Although I think mutual funds are an ex cellent investment, the problem is that most 
people don't know how to handle them. The key to su ccess in mutual funds is to sit and not to 
think. When you buy a fund, you want to be in it fo r 15 years or more. That is how you will make 
the really big money. But in order to do that, you need  the courage to sit through three, four, or five 
bear markets. The typical diversified growth stock fund will go up 75 to 100 percent in a bull 
market, but it will decline by only 20 to 30 percent in a bear market. 
So you treat a fund very differently from an individual stock account? 
Very, very differently. With an individual stock, you absolutely ha ve to have a stop-loss point, 
because you never know how far down the stock is going. I remember selling a $100 stock one 
time and it eventually went to $1.1 didn't have any idea it was going down that far, but what would 
have happened if I had held on to it? One mistake like that and you can't come back. 
In contrast, in a mutual fund, you should sit thr ough the bear markets. Since most funds will be 
diversified in 100 or more stocks across the Amer ican economy, when stocks  recover after a bear 
market, these funds will recover as well—they almost have to. Un fortunately, in a bear market, 
most people get scared and decide to switch, ruin ing their long-term holding plan. Actually, when a 
good, diversified growth fund is dow n sharply, you should buy more. 
Would it be fair to say that the general public tends to treat funds like they should individual 
stocks and stocks like th ey should funds? By that I mean, they  tend to hold on to their losers 
in individual stocks, but liquidate their mutual funds when they are down sharply. 
Yes, that is exactly right. Because of the emoti onal element, most of what people do in the market 
is wrong. 
Along that line, what are the biggest  mistakes investors generally make? 
In my book I have a chapter on eighteen common mistakes. 
The following list of common mistakes  is excerpted from O'Neil's book How to Make Money in 
Stocks, published by McGraw-Hill in 1988. 
1. Most investors never get past the starting gate  because they do not use good selection criteria.  114They do not know what to look for to find a succe ssful stock. Therefore, they buy fourth-rate 
"nothing-to-write-home-about" stocks that are not  acting particularly well in the marketplace and 
are not real market leaders. 
2. A good way to ensure miserable results is to b uy on the way down in price; a declining stock 
seems a real bargain because it's cheaper than it was a few months earlier. For example, an 
acquaintance of mine bought Inte rnational Harvester at $19 in March 1981 because it was down in 
price sharply and seemed a great bargain. This wa s his first investment, a nd he made the classic 
tyro's mistake. He bought a stock near its low fo r the year. As it turned out, the company was in 
serious trouble and was headed, at the time, for possible bankruptcy. 
3.An even worse habit is to average down in your  buying, rather than up. If you buy a stock at $40 
and then buy more at $30 and average out your co st at $35, you are following up your losers and 
mistakes by putting good money after bad. This amateur strategy can produce serious losses and 
weigh you down with a few big losers. 
4.The public loves to buy cheap stoc ks selling at low prices per shar e. They incorrectly feel it's 
wiser to buy more shares of stock in round lots of 100 or 1,000 shares, and this makes them feel 
better, perhaps more important. You would be be tter off buying 30 or 50 sh ares of higher-priced, 
sounder com panies. You must think in terms of the number of dollars you are investing, not the 
number of shares you can buy. Buy the best merchandi se available, not the poorest. The appeal of a 
$2, $5, or $10 stock seems irresistible. But most st ocks selling for $10 or lower are there because 
the companies have either been in ferior in the past or have had something wrong with them recent-
ly. Stocks are like anything else. You can't buy the best quality at the cheapest price! 
It usually costs more in commissions and markups  to buy low-priced stocks, and your risk is 
greater, since cheap stocks can drop 15 to 20 pe rcent faster than most  higher-priced stocks. 
Professionals and institutions will not normally  buy the $5 and $10 stocks, so you have a much 
poorer grade following and support for these low-quali ty securities. As discussed earlier, institu-
tional sponsorship is one of the ingredients needed to help pr opel a stock higher in price. 
5.First-time speculators want to make a killing in the market. They want too much, too fast, without 
doing the necessary study and preparation or acqui ring the essential methods and skills. They are 
looking for an easy way to make a quick buck without  spending any time or effort really learning 
what they are doing. 
6.Mainstream America delights in buying on tips,  rumors, stories, and advisory service 
recommendations. In other words, they are w illing to risk their hard-earned money on what 
someone else says, rather than on knowing for su re what they are doing themselves. Most rumors 
are false, and even if a tip is correct, the stock ironically will , in many cases, go down in price. 
7.Investors buy second-rate stocks because of divi dends or low price/earnings  ratios. Dividends are 
not as important as earnings per share; in fact, the more a compa ny pays in dividends, the weaker 
the company may be because it may have to pay high interest rates to replenish internally needed 
funds that were paid out in the form of dividends . An investor can lose th e amount of a dividend in 
one or two days' fluctuation in the price of the st ock. A low P/E, of course, is probably low because 
the company's past record is inferior. 
8.People buy company names they are familiar with, names they know. Just because you used to 
work for General Motors doesn't make General Motors necessarily a go od stock to buy. Many of 
the best investments will be names you won't k now very well but could and should know if you 
would do a little studying and research. 
9.Most investors are not able to find good inform ation and advice. Many, if they had sound advice, 
would not recognize or follow it. The average friend, stockbroker, or advisory service could be a 
source of losing advice. It is al ways the exceedingly small minority  of your friends, brokers, or 
advisory services that are successf ul enough in the market themselves  that merit your consideration. 
Outstanding stockbrokers or advisory services ar e no more frequent than are outstanding doctors, 
lawyers, or baseball players. On ly one out of nine baseball play ers that sign professional contracts 
ever make it to the big leagues. And, of course, the majority of ballplayers that graduate from 
college are not even good enough to  sign a professional contract, 
10. Over 98 percent of the masses ar e afraid to buy a stoc k that is beginning to go into new high 
ground, pricewise. It just seems too high to them . Personal feelings and opinions are far less  115accurate than markets. 
11.The majority of unskilled inve stors stubbornly hold onto their lo sses when the losses are small 
and reasonable. They could get out cheaply, but be ing emotionally involved and human, they keep 
waiting and hoping until their loss gets mu ch bigger and costs them dearly. 
12. In a similar vein, investors cash in small, easy-to -take profits and hold their losers. This tactic is 
exactly the opposite of correct investment procedure.  Investors will sell a st ock with a profit before 
they will sell one with a loss. 
13.Individual investors worry too much about taxes and commissions . Your key objective should 
be to first make a net profit. Excessive worryin g about taxes usually leads to unsound investments 
in the hope of achieving a tax sh elter. At other times in the pa st, investors lost a good profit by 
holding on too long, trying to get a long-term capit al gain. Some investors, even erroneously, 
convince themselves they can't sell becau se of taxes—strong ego, weak judgment. 
Commission costs of buying or sel ling stocks, especially through a di scount broker, are a relatively 
minor factor, compared to more important aspects such as making the right decisions in the first 
place and taking action when needed. One of the great  advantages of owning stock over real estate 
is the substantially lower commi ssion and instant marketability and liquidity. This enables you to 
protect yourself quickly at a low co st or to take advant age of highly profitable new trends as they 
continually evolve. 
14.The multitude speculates in options  too much because they think it is a way to get rich quick. 
When they buy options, they incorrectly concentrat e entirely in shorter-term,  lower-priced options 
that involve greater volatility and risk rather than in longer-term options. The limited time period 
works against short-term option holders. Many options  speculators also write what are referred to 
as "naked options," which are nothing but taking a great risk for a potentially small reward and, 
therefore, a relatively uns ound investment procedure. 
15.Novice investors like to put price limits on thei r buy-and-sell orders. They rarely place market 
orders. This procedure is poor because the investor  is quibbling for eighths and quarters of a point, 
rather than emphasizing the more important and la rger overall movement. Li mit orders eventually 
result in your completely missing the market and not  getting out of stocks that should be sold to 
avoid substantial losses. 
16.Some investors have trouble making decisions to buy or sell. In other words, they vacillate and 
can't make up their minds. They are unsure because  they really don't know what they are doing. 
They do not have a plan, a set of principles, or rules to guide them  and, therefore, are uncertain of 
what they should be doing. 
17.Most investors cannot look at stocks objectivel y. They are always hoping and having favorites, 
and they rely on their hopes and personal opinions ra ther than paying attention to the opinion of the 
marketplace, which is more frequently right. 
18.Investors are usually influenced by things that are not  really crucial, such as stock splits, 
increased dividends, news announcements, and br okerage firm or advisory recommendations. 
As someone who has spent a lifetime research ing stocks and the Am erican economy, do you 
have any opinions about the quality of research provided by Wall Street firms? 
An article in Financial World found that top-rated analysts ge nerally un-derperformed the S&P 
average. One major problem is that 80 percent of brokerage firm research is written on the wrong 
companies. Each industry analyst has to turn out his or her quot a of reports, even though only a few 
industry groups are leaders in each cycle. There is insufficient screening to determine which reports 
should actually be written. Another major problem with Wall Street research  is that it seldom 
provides sell recommendations. 
I would assume, given the consistency of your su ccess as a stock investor for over twenty-five 
years, that you don't think very much of the random walk theory. 
The stock market is neither efficient nor random . It is not efficient because there are too many 
poorly conceived opinions; it is not random because  strong investor emotions can create trends. 
In the most general sense, trading success requi res three basic components: an effective trade 
selection process, risk control, and discipline  to adhere to the first two items. William O'Neil 
provides a perfect illustration of  the successful trader. He has devised a specific strategy for  116selecting stocks (CANSLIM) , he has a rigorous risk control rale , and he has the discipline not to 
deviate from his selection and ri sk control strategies. In additi on to the specific stock selection 
methodology detailed in this chapter, traders and investors should find the advice regarding 
common mistakes, listed near the end of the interview, particularly useful. 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  117David Ryan-Stock Investment as a Treasure Hunt 
David Ryan does not believe in buying low-priced stocks. But that was not  always the case. He 
remembers flipping through the Wall Street Journal when he was thirteen years old a nd finding a 
$1 stock. He ran with the paper in  hand to his father and asked, "I f I go up to my room and get a 
dollar, can I buy this stock?" His fa ther told him that it didn't quite  work that way. "You have to do 
some research about a company before you invest in the stock," he explained. 
A few days later, leafing through the Wall Street Journal again, Ryan found an article on Ward 
Foods, which made Bit-O-Honey and Chunky candy ba rs. It seemed like a perfect investment, 
since he ate a lot of candy. His father set up an account for him, and he bought ten shares of the 
stock. He recalls getting all his friends to buy the candy bars  so the company would make more 
money and his stock would go up. That was the offici al start of Ryan's career  as a stock investor. 
Ryan's interest in the stock market increased as he grew older. By the time he was sixteen years 
old, he was subscribing to a weekly chart serv ice and attending investment seminars by William 
O'Neil and other market analysts. In college, he r ead every book on the stock market he could find. 
William O'Neil was Ryan's idol. After graduating coll ege in 1982, he decided to try to get a job at 
O'Neil's company. He told the receptionist of his interest in O'Neil's work  and his willingness to 
accept any job, no matter how menial, just to get his foot in the door. He was even willing to work 
for free. Ryan was hired, and within four years, hi s investment success led to his appointment as the 
youngest vice-president of the company, with re sponsibilities as a portf olio manager and as 
O'Neil's direct assistant in stock selection for institutional clients. 
Ryan achieved a degree of fame in his own regard when he won the 1985 stock division of the U.S. 
Investing Championship, a contest ran by former St anford University Professor Norm Zadeh. His 
return that year was a phenomenal 161 percent. As  if to demonstrate that  his performance was no 
one-year fluke, Ryan reentered the contest in 1986, virtually duplicating his previous year's 
performance with a 160 percent return second-pl ace finish. In 1987, he won the contest once again 
with another triple-digit return  year. For the three years as a whole, his compounded return was a 
remarkable 1,379 percent. 
Although most of the traders I interviewed have  a love for trading, none have the unbridled 
enthusiasm demonstrated by Ryan. To Ryan, the whol e process of stock selection is like a terrific 
game—a treasure hunt as he descri bes it—and he still can't believe he is getting paid to do it. 
The offices of the traders I interviewed ranged from the unadorned to the elaborate, but Ryan 
clearly had the low end of the spectrum staked out. Instead of an office, plain or otherwise, I was 
surprised to find Ryan's workplac e to be a cubicle within a nois y, floor-sized room. Ryan didn't 
seem to care about the lack of am enities. I suspect that as long as he was suppl ied with his charts 
and computer runs, he would probably be  content to work in a hall closet. 
Did your original job at William O'Ne il & Co. involve any market analysis? 
No, but once I was in, I just  started studying and studying. 
On your own time, I take it 
Yes. I would take stuff home every night and on weekends. 
What kind of things were you studying? 
I would go over our charts. I studied the company' s past recommendations. I studied historical 
models of great winning stocks to ingrain in my mind what a stock looke d like before it made a 
major move. I tried to get to the point where I wa s looking at the exact same things O'Neil did. He 
was my role model. 
Were you trading at this time? 
Yes, I opened a $20,000 account shortly after I started working for the company [1982]. 
How did you do? 
Initially, I ran the account up to about $52,000 by June 1983. Then  I gave it all back, including 
some of my starting capital. By  mid-1984, my account was down to $16,000. 
Do you know what you did wrong? 
Yes. I sat down and studied every mistake that I had made from June 1983 through the middle of  1181984. Probably my biggest mistake was that even t hough we were in a moderate bear market—the 
Dow came down from 1,296 to 1,078—I continued to pl ay as aggressively as I had during the bull 
market from August 1982 through June 1983.1 also made the mistake of buying stocks that were 
overextended. By that I mean I was buying stocks that had already moved 15 to 20 percent above 
their price bases. You should only bu y stocks that are within a few pe rcent of their base; otherwise, 
the risk is too great. 
I turned it around by learning from a ll the mistakes that I had made . In late 1984,1 sold a piece of 
real estate I owned and put al l the money in a stock account. 
Were you confident, despite your poor performance during mid-1983 to mid-1984, because 
you felt that you had figured out what you were doing wrong? 
Yes, because I had studied very hard and was determined to be disciplined, I thought I was going to 
do very well. So in 19851 entered the U.S. Inves ting Championship. I won th e stock division that 
year with a 161 percent return, I reentered the contest in subsequent years and substantially 
exceeded 100 percent returns in 1986 and 1987 as well. I was doing the exact same thing over and 
over again. I was buying stocks when they  had all the characteristics I liked. 
How are you doing this year [May 1988]? 
So far this year, I am down. We are in a different type of market: Stocks ar en't moving as quickly 
as they have in the last three years. I am playing with a much smaller amount this year, because I 
think the potential for making a lot of money is much more limited. 
You mentioned earlier that for a while you rea d virtually every book  on the markets you 
could find. What reading list would you give to  someone starting out who is serious about 
becoming a successful stock trader? 
Essential reading on top of the list is O'Neil's book, How to Make Money in Stocks (McGraw-Hill, 
New York, NY 1988). Another book that is must reading is How I Made Two Million Dollars in the 
Stock Market by Nicholas Darvas (Lyle Stuart, Inc., S ecaucus, NJ, 1986). A lot of people laugh at 
that title, but it is fun reading and you l earn a ton. Another book I would recommend is 
Reminiscences of a Stock Operator by Edwin Lefevre [reputedly  about Jesse Livermore]. 
Livermore himself wrote a very good thin volume, How to Trade in Stocks (Institute for Economic 
& Financial Research, Albuquerque, NM, 1986). 
Any others? 
A good one on what to look for in individual stocks is Super Performance Stocks by Richard Love 
(Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1977). The book has a great study on some of the greatest 
winners of all time. Another good one on picking stocks is Profile of a Growth Stock by Kermit 
Zieg and Susannah H. Zieg (Investor's Inte lligence, Larchmont, NY, 1972). I would also 
recommend Marty Zweig's book, Winning on Wall Street (Warner Books, Inc., New York, NY, 
1986) and Stan Weinstein's Secrets for Profiting in Bull and Bear Markets (Dow, Jones-Irwin, New 
York, NY, 1988), which has some good sections on short selling. Finally, on Elliott Wave analysis, 
which I think has some validity, there is Elliott Wave Principle by Frost and Prechter (New Classic 
Library, Inc., Gainesville , GA, 1978) and a book called Super Timing by an English fellow named 
Beckman (Milestone Publishers, London). 
All those books are good, but you lear n the most from the market itse lf. Every time I buy a stock, I 
write down the reasons why I bought it [he pulls out a binder contai ning annotated charts]. Doing 
this helps cement in my mind the characteristics of a winning stock. Maybe even more important, it 
helps me learn from my mistakes. 
What kind of things did you lear n by keeping your trader's diary? 
Not buying overextended stocks, using О'Neil's criteria for stock selection, and being as disciplined 
as possible. The more disciplined you can get,  the better you are going to do in the market. The 
more you listen to tips and rumors, the more money you're likely to lose. 
Has keeping this diary been an important part of your success? 
Absolutely. 
Can you describe your proce dure for selecting stocks?  119I start out by going through the stock charts a nd writing down the stocks with strong technical 
action. In other words, I write down all the stocks 
I want to take a closer look at. 
Your company follows 7,000 stocks; you can't possi bly look at 7,000 charts on a regular basis. 
I don't look through 7,000, but in a week I probably go through about 4,000 charts. So, I see a 
majority of the data base. Keep in mind ther e are probably about 1,500 to 2,000 stocks that trade 
under $ 10, and I don't like to look at those anyway. 
Is that a good rule: Avoid stocks under $10? 
Yes, because they are usually down there for a reason.  
Doesn't that knock out a lot of the OTC stocks? 
Yes, a lot of the smaller OTC stocks. 
But aren't those sometimes the best buys—the stoc ks that no one is paying any attention to? 
Sometimes. But many of thos e stocks stay down there for years a nd years. I would rather wait until 
they prove themselves by moving up to the $15 to $20 range. 
After you have reviewed the charts and written down the stocks that interest you, what do 
you look at next to screen your selection? 
I look at the five-year ea rnings growth record and the last two quarters of ea rnings relative to the 
previous year's levels. The quarterly comparison s show you if there is any deceleration in the 
earnings growth rate. For example, a 30 percent grow th rate over the last five years may look very 
impressive, but if in the last two quarters earni ngs were only up 10 percent and 15 percent, it warns 
you that the strong growth period  may be over. Of course, t hose two factors—the five-year 
earnings growth record and th e earnings during the past two quarters—are combined in our 
earnings per share (EPS) rank. [See the O'Neil chapter for a detailed explanation of the EPS.] 
What are you looking for in an EPS figure? 
As high as possible—at least above 80, and preferably above 90. Actually, a lot of stocks I buy 
have an EPS rank of 99. 
In my experience, markets usually anticipate. One thing that surprises me about the EPS is 
that I would think that the price of the stoc k would run up well before the earnings growth 
starts to be extremely positive. 
That is what a lot of people think. They say, "It's too late to buy the stock; the earnings are already 
on the table." However, in analyzing hundreds of the biggest winners, we found that, in many 
cases, the earnings had been on the table for a while. 
What would cause a stock to just sit despite very good earnings? 
The broad stock market may be weak and holding b ack the stock, but once the weight of the market 
comes off, these stocks just go right through the roof. 
How about if the stock market is  OK? What would keep the stock from taking off in that type 
of situation? 
Perceptions—people might not believ e that the earnings are going to continue as strongly as they 
had in the past. 
What else are you using besides the EPS and the earnings breakdown to screen your stock 
selections? 
The relative strength is very important. [The relative strength  ranks a stock's price change relative 
to all other stocks survey ed. See the O'Neil chapter for a detailed definition.] 
What are you looking for in relative strength? 
At least above 80, and preferably above 90.  
Intuitively, I would almost think that— 
"It has already gone too far. It can't get any stronger." 
Well, not necessarily that it can't get any stro nger, but it seems to me that, by definition,  120every stock has to have a high relative stren gth when it tops. How do you avoid sometimes 
buying the highs, if you are restricting you rself to high relati ve strength stocks? 
I am usually able to avoid that because in my firs t step of screening the ch arts, I generally rale out 
stocks that are overextended from  their base. Very often the stoc ks with the highest relative 
strength continue to outperform the market for months and months. For ex ample, Microsoft had a 
relative strength of 97 when it was at $50 a share. It eventually moved to $161. 
Are you implying that the higher the relative strength the better? 
Yes, I would rather go with a relative strength of  99 than 95. However, once the relative strength 
starts falling off, I usually get out of the stock. 
So you are not only paying attention to the relative strength value itself, but also the trend of 
the relative strength. 
Right. If the relative strength starts breaking an up trend, then I would be very cautious, even if it is 
still well above 80. 
Am I going in the right order, EPS to relative strength, in terms of how you filter down your 
initial stock list? 
I would probably place relative st rength first, then EPS. Many times the relative strength takes off 
before that big earnings report comes out. 
Do you also use the relative strength of the industry as a filter in your stock selection? 
Yes. Investor's Daily ranks industry groups between 0 and 200.1 usually want the industry group to 
be in the top 50. 
To continue the screening process, after checki ng the stock's relative strength, the EPS, and 
the industry relative strength, what is your next step? 
I check the number of shares outstanding. I am looking for stocks with less than thirty million 
shares and preferably only five to ten million shar es. Stocks with more than thirty million shares 
are more mature; they have alre ady split a few times. It is a case of supply and demand: Because 
you have more supply, it takes a lot more money to move those stocks. 
What else do you look at? 
You want some institutional ownership, because they really power a stock higher, but you don't 
want too much sponsorship. I would say 1 percen t to 20 percent mutual fund sponsorship is the 
ideal range. 
Are there any other important elements that  go into the stock selection process? 
Yes. There should be something new that attracts  people to that stock. For example, Reebok had 
shoes that were hot. Compaq ha d a fantastic portable computer. Microsoft was a leader in the 
software field. 
Doesn't that rule out most companie s that have been around for a while? 
Yes. You don't want to be playing General Electric  because there is usually  nothing rea lly hot or 
brand new going on. Occasionally, there are exceptions. For example, General Motors has gone 
virtually sideways for the last five  years, and it looks like they are trying to turn their situation 
around. 
With General Motors, might the "new" be the recent shift to high styling? 
Yes, but in most cases, you are going to find the new in emerging entrepreneurial growth 
companies. 
I would imagine if you go through 7,000 stocks, th ere must be quite a large number that meet 
your criteria. 
On average, there are probably only  about seventy stocks that meet the criteria, becau se it is tough 
to meet all the conditions. Then I cut those seventy down to about seven. 
How do you cut down from seventy to seven? 
I pick those stocks that have al l the characteristics plus a great-l ooking base pattern.  I also look at 
how the stock has done in the past. For example, ha s the stock doubled before? A lot of the stocks I  121buy have already doubled and tripled before I buy them. 
You actually prefer to buy a stock that has already  doubled as opposed to a stock that is in a 
long base? 
Yes, because that shows me there is something ve ry unusual going on, and if the situation is that 
good, a doubling may just be the beginning. It is probably going to double again. To sum it up, I am 
looking for the strongest stocks in  the market, in terms of both ear nings and the technical picture. 
Since you use an extremely rigorous selection process, do you have a high percentage of 
winners in your stock picks? 
No, only about 50/50, because I cut the losers very quickly. The maximum loss I allow is 7 percent, 
and usually I am out of a losing st ock a lot quicker. I make my mone y on the few stocks a year that 
double and triple in price. The profits in those trades easily make up for all the small losers. 
How long do you typically hold a stock? 
I usually hold my big winners for about six to twel ve months, stocks that aren't that strong about 
three months, and my losers less than two weeks. 
Do you pick an objective on the stocks you buy? 
No. I usually wait until the stock runs up, builds a nother base, and then breaks down. That is when 
I liquidate. 
Do you think people should only use market orders? 
In a dull market that is just trading back and fo rth, you could put in a limit order. But if you really 
think the stock is going to make a big move—and that should be the only reason you are buying the 
stock to begin with—then there is  no reason to haggle over an eight h of a point. Just buy the stock. 
The same thing applies to the downside; if you think the stock is going to drop, just sell it. 
I learned the lesson about market orders in 1982 when I was trying to buy Textone, which was 
trading at $15, for $14%. The next day it jumped llh points, and I couldn't bring myself to buy the 
stock at $16k when I could have bought it at $15 a day ear lier. That stock eventually went to $45. 
One element of your trading styl e is buying a stock when it makes a new high. Wouldn't the 
fundamental screening conditions you use have  been in place well before that point? 
In some cases, they might have been. But I am  trying to buy a stock when you have the most 
chance of making money. When a stock is coming o ff the low end of a base  back to the high end, 
there will be a lot of people who bought it near the highs and sat with a loss for months. Some of 
those people are going to be happy to  get out at even, and that crea tes a lot of overhead resistance. 
So, a stock which is at new highs has much more of an open running field? 
Right, because no one ahead of yo u is at a loss and wants to ge t out at the fi rst opportunity. 
Everybody has a profit; everybody is happy. 
But the downside of that is if you wait for a b reakout to new highs, a lot of times the market 
will pull back into the trading range. Ho w do you avoid getting whipsawed in those 
situations? 
You can tell a lot by the volume. If the volume doubl es one day and the stock moves to a new high, 
it is telling you a lot of people are in terested in the stock and buying it. 
So volume becomes very important as a filt ering process to avoid getting whipsawed. 
Yes. If the stock moves to new high ground, but the volume is only up 10 percent, I would be wary. 
Do you buy it the first day the stock breaks out to new highs, or do you wait for it to 
consolidate for a few days? 
I want to buy it as soon as it goes to new highs. 
If you buy a stock at new highs and it then pulls back  into the range, at  what point do you 
decide it was a false breakout? For example, assume a stock that has been trading between 
$16 and $20 goes to $21 and you buy it. What do you do if two days later the stock is back to 
$19? 
If it reenters its base, I have a rule to cut at least 50 percent of the position.  122If it reenters its base at all? Do you mean even if  it is just below the top end of the base, or do 
you require some minimum penetration? 
No, if it just reenters the base. In some cases, it w ill break out and come back to the top of the base, 
but not reenter. That's fine, and I will stay with the stock. But if the top of the base was $20 and it 
breaks back to $193A, I want to sell at least half of the position because the stock didn't keep on 
moving. Frequently, when a stock dr ops back into its base, it goe s all the way back down to the 
lower end of the base. In the example, if it goe s from $21 down to $19X it wi ll often go all the way 
back down to $16. Therefore, you wa nt to cut your losses quickly. 
From a technical perspective, is the price goi ng back into the base a bearish indicator? 
Yes. Stocks should be at a profit the first day you buy them. In fact, having a profit on the first day 
is one of the best indicators that you are going to make money on the trade. 
Do you use the table in Investor's Daily that lists the stocks with the greatest percentage 
increase in volume relative to the pa st fifty-day average volume levels? 
Yes, I use it to help spot stocks that  are just about ready to take off.  
Are you using it to verify stocks  you have already picked out? 
Yes. After I have done my weekly screen to select  the stocks I am interest ed in buying, I sometimes 
wait for the stock to hit that column as a timing signal. 
Can you elaborate on using volume as a trading tool? 
When a stock that has been moving up starts consolidating, you want to see volume dry up. You 
should see a downtrend in volume. Then when volum e starts picking up again, it usually means the 
stock is ready to blast off. 
So, in the consolidation phase, decreasing volume is good. If you continue to see very high 
volume, do you start thinking potential top? 
Yes, because that shows that a lot of people are ge tting out of the stock. You want an increase in 
volume when the stock breaks out, but you want a d ecrease in volume as the stock consolidates. 
Any other volume signals you look for? 
When the market, or a stock, is bottoming, you want  to see increased volume combined with an 
absence of further price progress on the downside. For example, if  the Dow declines from 2,200 to 
2,100, trades down to 2,085 the next day, and then closes higher on increased volume, it 
demonstrates support. It suggests that  there are a lot of buyers coming in. 
The screens you have described in selectin g stocks are essentially O'Neil's CANSLIM 
methodology. [See the O'Neil chapter for definiti on.] Did you add any of your own elements 
to his approach? 
Yes, I learned that most of our  greatest winning recommendations  started off with prices under 
thirty times earnings. О'Nell says the P/E [price/earnings] ratio is not important. I think it is, in that 
your success ratio is a lot highe r on lower P/E ratio stocks. 
But I guess not too low P/E ratios? 
When I'm talking about lower P/E ratio stocks, I mean  stocks that have a P/E ratio that is between 
even and up to two times the S&P 500 P/E ratio. So if the S&P 500 is at fifteen times earnings, you 
should try to buy stocks with P/E ratios be tween 15 and 30. Once you start going much beyond 
double the S&P 500 P/E ratio level, your timing has to be more exact. You are bound to make a 
few more mistakes on higher P/E ratio stocks. 
Do you therefore avoid high P/E ratio stocks? 
Yes, in many cases I do. The most profitable s ituation is when you find a stock with a strong 
earnings trend that is trading at a P/E ra tio in line with the broad market ratio. 
If you avoid high P/E ratio stocks, wouldn't that have prevented you from catching the whole 
biomedical group move?  
That was a little different because of the fact that the whole group was trading at high P/E ratios. 
Does that imply that there should be an exception made for a new industry?  123Yes, you don't want to be absolu tely rigid with these rules. 
Has the basic market behavior stayed the same in the 1980s versus the 1970s and the 1960s? 
Yes, the same types of stocks work time after time. It hasn't changed at all. We can take one of the 
greatest winning stocks from 1960 and line it up w ith one of the best stocks in 1980 and they are 
going to have exactly the same characteristics. 
Do you have any thoughts on the subject of short selling? 
I need more time to study it and more experience. Howe ver, to pick a short, I think you need to flip 
all these characteristics we were talking about . Instead of a good growth record, you should look 
for a poor five-year growth record and quarterly earnings that are decelerat ing. The stock should be 
losing relative strength, breaking uptrends, and starting to hit new lows. 
Do you think that short selling may be a criti cal element for superior performance if we go 
into a long bear market? 
Yes, I think it would help. But, Bill  O'Neil will tell you that shorting is about three times as hard as 
buying stocks. Bill says he has made substantial mone y in only two of the pa st nine bear markets. 
He thinks the best thing you can do in  a bear market is just sit it out. 
How do you recognize a bear market before it's too late? 
By how well my individual stocks are doing. If, during the bull phase, the leaders start losing, it 
indicates that a bear market is de veloping. If I have five or six st ocks in a row that get stopped out, 
a caution flag goes up. 
What else do you look for to signal a bear market? 
Divergence between the Dow and the daily advance/decline line [a graph of the cumulative net 
difference between the number of New York Stock Exchange stocks advanci ng each day versus the 
number declining]. The advance/decline tends to  top out a few months before the Dow does. 
Did that happen in 1987? 
The advance/decline topped out during the first qua rter of 1987, well before the stock market peak 
in August. 
Were you looking for a top because of that? 
Not at that point, because a lot of the individual st ocks were still doing very well. The big clue that 
the market was really topping was after the Dow ca me off its high at 2,746, there was a very feeble, 
low-volume rally, and then the market got hit for a nother 90-point loss. At that juncture, I decided 
it was time to move out of the market. 
Because the rally was on low volume? 
Yes, and the fact that there were very few stocks that participated in the rally; the advance/decline 
line did not move as high as it did on the previous rally. Also, in late August, the discount rate was 
raised for the first time in three years. I think that really stabbed the market. 
You haven't been in the business that long. Do you have the confidence that you will be able 
to trade successfully almost every year for a long time? 
Yes, because I have established a very defined se t of principles that w ill provide the foundation for 
successful trading for years to come. Also, I plan to never stop learning. 
Do you feel you are getting better as a trader? 
Yes. If you try to learn from every single trad e that you make, you are onl y going to get better and 
better as time goes on. 
Why are you so much more successful  than the typical stock investor? 
Because I am doing something that I love to do and find fascinating. After eight or nine hours at 
work, I go home and spend more time on the market s. I have the charts delivered to me on 
Saturdays, and I go through them for three or f our hours on Sunday. I think if you love what you 
are doing, you are going to be a lot more successful. 
A lot of people who invest use their spare ti me to study the market and still have only 
mediocre, or even losing, results.  124That is probably because they have not found a disc iplined system for picking stocks. They read an 
article and say, "That sounds like a good stock, I'll buy it." Or they buy a stoc k because their broker 
recommends it. 
What advice would you give the novice trader? 
The single most important advice I can give anybody is: Learn from your mistakes. That is the only 
way to become a successful trader. 
Any final comments? 
The greatest thing about the market is that it is always fun to be looking for that next big winner—
trying to find the stock with all the characteristic s that are going to make it have a big move. The 
feeling isn't any different now than when I was only trading 500 shares. There is still the same 
satisfaction of knowing you found a stoc k before it made its big move. 
You make it sound like a game. 
It is. To me it is like a giant treasure hunt. Some where in here [he pats the weekly chart book] there 
is going to be a big winner, and I am trying to find it. 
The conventional wisdom about how to make money in stocks is summarized by the semi-facetious 
advice: Buy low and sell high. David Ryan would disagree. His philosophy can  be summarized as: 
Buy high and sell higher. In fact, Ryan usually will not consider buying any stock selling for less 
than $10. 
Ryan's success is basically due to using apre cise methodology and applyi ng great discipline to 
follow it. As Ryan has clearly demonstrated, a tr ading methodology doesn't have to be original to 
be extremely successful. Ryan readily acknowledges that most of his approach has been learned 
directly from the writings and teachings of William O'Neil. With the help of hard work and in-
depth study, he has been able to apply O'Neil' s trading philosophy with great effectiveness. 
When traders deviate from their own rules, they invariably tend to lose. Ryan is no exception. 
During mid-1983 to mid-1984, he witnessed a period of extremely poor performance. He let his 
previous trading success go to his head by repeated ly breaking one of his ow n cardinal rules: Never 
buy an overextended stock [a stock that is trading far above its most recent price base]. The 1983-
1984 experience made a lasting impression on Rya n, and he has not repeated that mistake. 
Maintaining a trader's diary is an essential elem ent of Ryan's approach. Every time he buys a stock, 
Ryan annotates the chart with his reasons for buyi ng the stock. Whenever he liquidates or adds to 
an existing position, a new chart is included with updated comments.  This approach has helped 
Ryan reinforce in his mind the key characteris tics of winning stocks. Perhaps, more important, 
reviewing his past entries ha s helped him avoid repeati ng similar trading mistakes. 
Ryan's basic approach, like William O'Neil's appr oach, is to buy value and strength. He also 
believes in focusing on the very best stocks as o pposed to diversifying his portfolio. One important 
observation Ryan made, which many other traders may find helpful, is that his best trades are 
usually winners right from the start. Thus, he ha s little reservation about getting out of a losing 
trade quickly. The maximum he will risk on any trad e is a 7 percent price d ecline. A rigid stop-loss 
rule is an essential ingredient to the tr ading approach of many successful traders. 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  125Marty Schwartz-Champion Trader 
I interviewed Marty Schwartz at his office after trading hours. I found him to be very opinionated 
and intense about the subject of trading. This inte nsity occasionally spills over into anger when a 
raw nerve is hit (such as program trading). In fact , Schwartz readily admits that he finds anger a 
useful trait in trading. None of  this "going with the market fl ow" philosophy for Schwartz. In his 
view, the marketplace is an arena and other traders are the adversaries. 
I was also struck by Schwartz's dedication to hi s daily work routine. He was doing his market 
analysis when I arrived and continued to run th rough his calculations during our interview. When I 
left that evening, his analysis was still unfinishe d. Although he appeared very tired, I had no doubt 
that he would finish his work  that evening. Schwartz has followed his daily work routine 
religiously during the past nine years. 
Schwartz spent a decade losing money on his tradi ng before he found his stride as a remarkably 
successful professional trader. During his earlier year s, he was a well-paid securities analyst, who, 
as he describes it, was always broke because of market losses. Eventually, he changed his trading 
methodology, in the process of transforming hims elf from a repeated loser to an amazingly 
consistent winner. Not only has Schwartz scored e normous percentage gains in every year since he 
turned full-time trader in 1979, but he has done so without ever losing more than 3 percent of his 
equity on a month-end to month-end basis. 
Schwartz trades independently from an office at home. He is proud of the fact that he has no 
employees. Solitary traders of this type, no ma tter how successful, are usually unknown to the 
public. Schwartz, however, has attained a degree of  fame through repeated entries in the U.S. 
Trading Championships, run by Norm  Zadeh, a Stanford University professor. His performance in 
these contests has been nothing short of ast ounding. In nine of the ten four-month trading 
championships he entered (typically with a star ting stake of $400,000), he made more money than 
all the other contestants combined. His average re turn in these nine contests was 210 percent—
nonannualized! (In the one remaining four-month cont est he witnessed a near  breakeven result.) In 
his single entry in a one-year contest, he scored a 781 percent return. Schwartz's entry into these 
contests is his way of telling th e world that he is the best trad er around. In terms of risk/reward 
ratios, he may well be. 
Please start by telling me about your early days. 
How far back do you want me to go?  
From whenever you think is appropriate. 
Well it is very relevant to go back to my ch ildhood, quite frankly. Should I lay down on the couch? 
I grew up in New Haven in a family of modest means. I was very hard working. When I was seven 
or eight I would go out with a snow shovel and come back with $10 after a snowstorm. 
Even now, I still put in about tw elve hours a day. I feel uncomfortab le not doing the work; that's 
why I am doing it now as you are sitting here. I calculate a lot of math ematical ratios and 
oscillators, and I post my own charts . My attitude is that I always want to be better prepared than 
someone I'm competing against. The way I prep are myself is by doing my work each night. 
As I grew up, I realized that education was my ticket, probabl y because it was strongly emphasized 
in my family. I studied hard and was an honor student in high school. 
I was accepted to Amherst College, which was one of the great experiences  of my life. When I 
went to freshman orientation they said, "Look to your  left and right and real ize that half of you are 
going to be in the top half of th e class and half of you are going to be in the bottom half." Most of 
those who matriculated there, including myself, were  in the top 5 percent of their high school class. 
Perceiving that I wasn't going to  be at the top of everything was a difficult first realization. 
It was the first time in my life I ha d to struggle. I even had to get a tutor for calculus because I just 
wasn't getting the concept. But when I finally got  it, when the light bulb clicked on, it was like 
looking at a magnificent painting. I really experienced the joy of l earning and working hard there. 
Before, studying was only a means to an end; now, I found that learning itself was a real joy. 
Amherst had a profound influence on me. 
After graduating in 1967,1 was accepted to the Columbia Business School. At the time, the  126government had just ended graduate school militar y deferments. Since I was unhappy at Columbia 
and combat in Vietnam didn't appeal to me, I joined a U.S. Marine Corps reserve unit that was 
recruiting officers. 
You have to be somewhat crazy to be in the Mari nes; it is a very unusual organization. They push 
you to the edge and then rebuild you in their own mold. However, I have developed a great respect 
for that bureaucracy, because throughout the Marine Corps history, they've been consistent in their 
training procedure. As a second li eutenant you have forty-six lives under your control, so you must 
be well skilled. They put you under a lot of pressure. If you couldn't cut the mustard, you didn't get 
the bars. We had an attrition rate that  I believe approached 50 percent. 
I was the only reservist in Offi cers Candidate School in Quantico at that time. There were 199 
regulars who went to Vietnam, but I came home; that  was the deal I made when I was recruited. I 
was also the only Jewish person there, and they weren't too favorably disposed toward Jews. One 
time, the platoon sergeant drew the Star of David on my forehead with a magic marker. I wanted to 
knock the crap out of him, but I figured he didn't really know the historic significance of what it 
meant. I knew he was just trying to find any kind of pressure point that would make me break. The 
hardest thing I had to do was scrub the magic mark er off my forehead. That's a bitch [he laughs]. 
Anyway, I persevered and made it through successfully. I co nsider that a really fine achievement. 
The feeling improves as time passes, and you forget the real pain of the experience. 
The rigorous Marine training gave me the confidence to believe that I could perform at levels 
beyond my previous expectations. Just as Am herst had strengthened my mind, the Marines 
strengthened my body. The two expe riences convinced me that I could do almost anything if I 
worked hard enough and provided the groundwork for my successful trading. That's not to say it 
worked right away, because it didn't. 
After getting out of the Marines, I returned to Co lumbia and held some boring part-time jobs while 
I completed my M.B.A. My first full-time job was as a securities an alyst at Kuhn Loeb. I 
specialized in the health and re tail field, and I stayed there fo r two years. I found that, on Wall 
Street, the best way to receive a pay increase wa s to change jobs. The company you work for never 
wants to pay you as much as a company trying to recruit you. 
I left for XYZ in 1972.1 want to leave out the firm's  name and other particulars for reasons that will 
soon become obvious. This proved to  be one of the most difficult periods in my life and career. 
XYZ had thirty analysts, divided into three subgr oups often. Because the research director didn't 
want to work, he had one of the senior analysts of each group review the work of the analysts. The 
policy was that our research reports  would be circulated and critique d by the other analysts within 
the subgroups prior to being sent out. 
I had written a bearish report on hospital management stocks, saying that the industry would 
eventually go to a utility rate of return. As pa rt of the normal routine, the draft was circulated 
among the other analysts, one of whom got drunk one  night on a flight home  from California and 
told a client about my report. He even sent him a copy of the report in progr ess. What right did he 
have to send out my work? The stocks began plum meting prior to the report's release, because the 
client started spreading rumors that a negative report was about to be issued. 
It was a bitter experience. I had to testify for six hours before the New York Stock Exchange. My 
company's counsel told me, "We will represent you, but should our interests diverge at any point, 
we will inform you." 
At the time, did you know what had happened? 
No, I didn't, but I assumed that everything would be all right if I told the truth, which I did. I was 
totally exonerated; the exchange realized I had been set up. The drug analyst eventually confessed 
because an exchange official found out what happe ned by piecing it all together. It was a rotten, 
bitter experience for me, and I was very sour. I shut the door of my office and stopped working. I 
lost the spark, the drive, the desire to succeed. 
What were you doing at that time? 
I was still doing reports, but I didn't have my hear t in it. Besides that whole negative experience, it 
was early 1973, and I felt the mark et was topping out. I had become very interested in technical 
analysis. At the time, the advanc e/decline line had formed a major top many months earlier. I felt  127that the market and the stocks I was covering were going to go down. Still, people wanted to know 
how many widgets a company was selling and at what price. I lost the spirit to write bullish reports, 
because if stock prices are going down, who car es how many widgets are being sold. I was 
covering growth stocks, which in those days sold at forty or fifty times earnings. It was all so 
ridiculous! 
Were you discouraged from writing bearish repor ts? Also, what ever happened to the bearish 
report that was leaked? 
Nobody wrote bearish reports on Wall Street at that  time. I was allowed to  complete the bearish 
report on the hospital management industry, but I don' t believe they ever intended to publish it. Of 
course, after it was leaked, they were forced to  rush it to the printer to save their scalps. 
What eventually happened? 
I lost my job in the bear market and was out of work for four months. That  was a very interesting 
period, because I believe you learn the most thro ugh adversity. I had a bout $20,000, which in those 
days was a lot of money, and I was going to trad e. I found a real lunatic who had developed 
computer programs for trading commodities. At the time, he had to rent time on a monster machine 
to run programs that today you could do on any PC. He was using different moving averages, that 
sort of thing. I put some of my  money in with him, and I lost most of it—along with my dreams of 
glory. 
Having dissipated my capital, I decided I had to go back to work. I was in for a shock. Although I 
had been totally honest and fort hright, I was tainted. "Oh, ar en't you the guy who wrote that 
report?" It didn't matter that I had been totally  ethical and exonerated. People don't want to get 
involved with any controversy, even  if it wasn't of your own making. 
A friend of mine helped me get a job at Edward s & Hanly, which, although it was a retail-oriented 
firm, had a group of analysts who became real star s. It was there that I met Bob Zoellner, the 
managing partner of the firm. He was a great, great trader. He almost single-handedly kept the firm 
afloat in 1974 by shorting stocks and making money in the firm's capital account, while they were 
losing money on the operating side. He started his own hedge fund in 1976 and went on to become 
an extraordinary success. 
I always had a good nose as a securi ties analyst, and it has stood me in good stead. When I noticed 
that the head of research, who ne ver went out to lunch, began going out to lunch regularly, I started 
interviewing for another job. So, when the firm we nt bankrupt in fall 1975, I had another job lined 
up at Loeb Rhoades. 
In 1976,1 met my wife-to-be and she had a profound effect on me. She made me realize that my 
life was not a dress reh earsal; it was the real th ing and I had been sc rewing it up. Although I had 
steadily earned good salaries, I was still almost broke because I c onsistently lost money in the 
market. 
We got married in March 1978. By that time, I wa s working at E. F. Hutton. Being married made 
going on business trips harder and harder. When you ar e twenty-five, seeing friends from college in 
different cities around the country is very exciting, but when you get in your thirties, it gets real 
stale. My wife literally had to push me out  the door when I had to go on these trips. 
I resented what I called the "tap dances," which ma de you feel like a piece of meat. You meet with 
portfolio managers to give them your views on the stocks you follow, so that they will give 
commission business to your firm. On  a typical trip, you might have five appointments in Houston, 
fly to San Antonio for dinner, and then fly to Dallas later that night  to be ready for breakfast the 
next morning. I got sick of it. 
I wanted to have a family, but I felt that I wasn't able to handle it financia lly. I had resisted getting 
married because I was afraid of being tapped out. Bu t, at that point, I wonde red whether it had been 
a self-fulfilling prophecy. People se em to know how to handle failure because they can produce it 
themselves. It almost becomes a negative cause a nd effect cycle, whereby they produce it, they 
know how to handle it, and they wallow in it. 
By mid-1978,1 had been a security analyst for eight years and it had become intolerable. I knew I 
had to do something different. I always knew I wanted to work fo r myself, have no clients, and 
answer to no one. That, to me, was the ultimate goa l. I had been brooding for years, "Why wasn't I  128doing well when I was groomed to be successful?" I decided it was now time to be successful. 
When a brokerage firm wants to hire you, they' ll give you anything. Once you are there, they are 
far less responsive. So, when I was being roman ced by Hutton, I asked for a quote machine in my 
office. I was the only securities analyst that had a quote machine. During my last year at Hutton, I 
started closing the door to my office so that I co uld watch the market. I talked to my friend Bob 
Zoellner several times a day, and he taught me ho w to analyze market action. For example, when 
the market gets good news and goes down, it means the market is very weak; when it gets bad news 
and goes up, it means the market is healthy. 
During that year, I started taking trial subscriptions to a lot of different newsletters. I consider 
myself a synthesizer; I didn't necessarily crea te a new methodology, but  I took a number of 
different methodologies and molded  them into my own approach. 
I found a guy, Terry Laundry, who lived in Nantuc ket and had an unorthodox approach called the 
Magic Т Forecast. He was an МГГ  engineering graduate with a math background, and that 
appealed to me. His basic theory  was that the market spent th e same amount of time going up as 
going down. Only the amplitude was different. 
In my experience, markets come down a lot quick er than they go up. Doesn't that contradict 
the theory? 
The market movement before it goes down may be a distributive process. I call them M-tops. The 
point you use to measure the time element is not  the price high, but an oscillator high, which 
precedes the price high. That, in f act, is a major cornerstone of hi s work. The theory had different 
properties that I learned, and it ha s been extremely helpful to me. 
For the record, what is the name of Laundry's book? 
There is no book. He just extolled his theory through his various ne wsletters. He also had some 
pamphlets. Actually, it was kind of  funny. After I mentioned him in a Barren's article, he got a lot 
of inquiries for his pamphlets. He is a little ecc entric. His response was, "I don't have any copies 
available." He should have prin ted them and made some money. 
I developed and synthesized a number of indicators th at I used to determine when the market was at 
a lower-risk entry point. I focused on determin ing mathematicalprobab ilities. Although 
occasionally there are situations where the market goes three standard deviations instead of two, 
based on the likelihood that 98 per cent of the moves will st op at two standard de viations, I'll take 
that bet any day of the week. And, if I am wrong, I am going to use risk control and stop myself out 
X dollars away. That is the most critical element. 
Anyway, I subscribed to all these letters, deve loped a methodology, and trad ed like crazy. By mid-
1979,1 hadrun $5,000 up to $140,000 in just two years. 
When did you turn from a loser to a winner? 
When I was able to separate my ego needs from  making money. When I was able to accept being 
wrong. Before, admitting I was wrong was more upse tting than losing the money. I used to try to 
will things to happen. I figured it  out, therefore it can't be wr ong. When I became a winner, I said, 
"I figured it out, but if I'm wrong, I'm getting the he ll out, because I want to save my money and go 
on to the next trade." By living the philosophy that my winners are always in  front of me, it is not 
so painful to take a loss. If  I make a mistake, so what! 
Did you make a complete transition fr om fundamental to technical analysis? 
Absolutely. I always laugh at peopl e who say, "I've never met a rich te chnician." I love that! It is 
such an arrogant, nonsensical response. I used fundamentals for nine years and got rich as a 
technician. 
But you were still doing fundament al analysis as an analyst? 
Yes, to earn a salary. But my wife said to me, "Go out on your own. You're thirty-four and you've 
always wanted to work for yourself. The worst th at can happen is that you '11 go back to doing 
what you were doing before." 
I always pictured myself as being brave, courage ous, and strong, but when it came time to take the 
chance, I was scared out of my mind. I ha d $140,000, of which about $30,000 was tied up in tax 
deals and $92,500 was used to pay for a seat on th e American Stock Exchange. That left me with  129about $20,000 when I went on the floor as a mark et maker. I borrowed $50,000 from my in-laws, 
which gave me $70,000 of working capital. 
I started off losing in my first tw o days in the business. I got in volved in Mesa Petroleum options 
because Zoellner, whom I profoundly respected, t hought they were significantly undervalued. I 
called him the second day from the floor, "Are you sure you are right?" I must have had a grand 
total of ten options. I was down $1,800 and dying. I wa s petrified because, in my mind, I was down 
almost 10 percent, since I didn't consider my in-l aws' money part of my own working capital. The 
third day, Mesa options started going up and I never looked back. 
After the first four months, I was ahead by $100,000. The next year I earned $600,000. After 
1981,1 never earned less than seven figures. I rememb er talking to a good friend of mine in 1979 
and saying, "I don't think anybody can make $40,000 a month trading options." Now I can do that 
in a day without a problem. 
You were doing very well on the floor. Why did you leave? 
It was very slow during lunchtime in  those years. I used to go to an upstairs office to eat my lunch. 
While I was at my desk eating a sandwich, I woul d do my charts and look for different ideas. I 
came to realize that I could see much more sitting at  the desk, looking at a machine, than being at a 
post, trading an option. On the floor, the specialists  chose the symbols they wanted to keep on the 
quote machines, because they paid the rent on them. So you always had to run around to find what 
you wanted to see. I felt much  more comfortable upstairs. 
About a year and a half later, af ter I started earning a lot of money, the floor wasn't big enough. 
There was a much bigger arena to play in. Another reason for my m ove was the fact that, in 1981, a 
change in the tax laws made it more lucrativ e to trade futures than stocks and options. 
In my futures trading, I didn't try to make two one year, four the next, eight the next, etc. I didn't 
earn significantly more in my futures trading in 1987 than I did in 1982, because I used my profits 
to invest in real estate and other things to enhan ce the quality of my life. 
I was broke in the 1970s, and I never wanted to  be broke again. My ph ilosophy was that if you 
make money every month, nothing bad is going to happen to you. So, you won't be the richest 
person. You'll never be the richest person anywa y. What difference does it make? I'm proud of my 
futures trading, because I took $40,000 and ran it up to about $20 million with never more than a 3 
percent drawdown. 
Did you continue trading stocks during this period? 
Yes, but with a different mentality. I traded stoc ks from a little longer time horizon. I don't feel the 
same pressure when I own 100,000 shares of stock as when I own 100 S&Ps. 
Will you trade stocks as readily from  the short side as the long side? 
No, I find it harder to trade st ocks from the short side.  
Because of the uptick rule? 
No, it is just easier to short the S&P, because you get so much more bang for the buck. Also, I hate 
the specialist system; they are always trying to con you to death. I'll give you my view on 
specialists: Never in my life have I met a less talented group of people who make a 
disproportionately large amount of money relative to their skills. Having the specialist book is the 
most extraordinary advantage one could ever ask fo r. In normal markets, th e specialists can always 
define their risk. If th ey have a bid for 20,000 down \ they can buy the st ock, knowing they can 
always get out'/«lower. So, they are protected. I always tell my friends to have their daughters 
marry the son of a specialist. 
I can't stand most established institutions. I ha ve a me-against-them mentality, which I believe 
helps me be a better, more aggressive trader. It help s as long as I maintain an  intellectual bias in my 
work and discipline in money management. 
What was your experience during the w eek of the October 19 stock crash? 
I came in long. I have thought about it, and I w ould do the same thing again. Why? Because on 
October 16, the market fell 108 poi nts, which, at the time, was the biggest one-day point decline in 
the history of the stock excha nge. It looked climactic to me, and I thought that was a buying 
opportunity. The only problem was that it was a Friday. Usually a down Friday is followed by a  130down Monday. 
I don't think Monday would have been nearly as ba d as it was, if Treasury Secretary James Baker 
had not started verbally bludgeoning the Germans a bout interest rates over the weekend. He was so 
belligerent. Once I heard Baker, I knew I was dead. 
So, you knew that you were in trouble over the weekend? 
Yes. Also, Marty Zweig, who is a friend of mine, was on "Wall St reet Week" on Friday evening, 
talking about a possible de pression. I called Marty th e next day, and he said  he thought there was 
another 500 points risk in the mark et. Of course, he didn't know it was going to happen in one day. 
What made him so bearish at the time? 
I think his monetary indicators we re terribly negative. Remember, th e bonds were sinking rapidly at 
the time. 
What happened that Monday? When did you get out? 
The high in the S&P on Monday was 269.1 liquidate d my long position at 267'/2.1 was real proud 
of that because it is very hard to pull the trigge r on a loser. I just dumped everything. I think I was 
long 40 contracts coming into that day, and I lost $315,000. 
One of the most suicidal tilings you can do in tr ading is to keep adding to a losing position. Had I 
done that, I could have lost $5 million that day. It was painful, and I was bleeding, but I honored 
my risk points and bit the bullet. 
That's another example where my Marine training came into play. They teach you never to freeze 
when you are under attack. One of the tactics in the Marine Corps officer's manual is either go 
forward or backward. Don't just sit there if you ar e getting the hell beat out  of you. Even retreating 
is offensive, because you are still doing something. It is the same thing in the market. The most 
important thing is to keep enough powder to make your comeback. I did real well after October 19. 
In fact, 1987 was my mo st profitable year. 
You liquidated your long position very well on October 19. Did you think about actually 
going short? 
I thought about it, but I said to my self, "Now is not the time to wo rry about making money; it is the 
time to worry about keeping what you have made." Wh enever there is a really  rough period,  I try to 
play defense, defense, defense. I believe in protecting what you have. 
The day of the crash, 1 got out of most of my positions and pr otected my family. Then at 1:30 
P.M., with the Dow down 275 points, I went to my  safe deposit box and took my gold out. Half an 
hour later, I went to another bank and started wr iting checks to get my cash out. I started buying 
Treasury bills and preparing for the worst. I had never seen anything like what was going on. 
You were seriously worried about the banks going under? 
Why not? The stories I heard, subs equently, from people on the ope rations side of the business 
would have stopped the hearts of the public if they had known what was going on. The banks 
weren't meeting any of the calls at the brokerage firms. On Tuesday morning, we were within hours 
of the whole thing totally collaps ing. So my caution was well advised. 
I think my fear of a depression  is related to my father grad uating college in 1929. If you talk to 
people who got out of college at that time, it is as though a ten-year peri od is missing from their 
lives. There was just nothing substantial going on in this country. That always stuck with me, 
because I feared it so much. I th ink that is one of the reasons why I don't try to increase my 
earnings geometrically. On the day of the crash, when I looked at my son in his crib, I thought, I 
don't want him ever to ask me, "Dad, why didn't you do everything you could have done?" 
When did you start trading again? 
Wednesday of that week. It was funny because I st arted out trading only one  or two S&P contracts 
at a time. The S&P was trading in full point increments [equivalent to $500 per contract, compared 
to $25 for a minimum tick], and I didn't know how  to handicap what was going on. From past 
experiences, I knew we were in some sort of op portunity period, but they were rewriting the rale 
book. My attitude is: Never risk your family's securi ty. I didn't need to make any more money at 
that point. On Wednesday, the market got up to an area where I thought it should be shorted. I  131ended Wednesday short twelve S&P contract s, which for me was a miniscule position. 
That night, Bob Prechter [editor of the Elliott Wave Theorist, a widely followed advisory letter] put 
out a negative hotline message. The next morn ing, the market was under tremendous pressure, 
partially because of that recommendation, but main ly because one of the biggest fund managers in 
the country was trying to liquidate  a monster long position. It has been stated that he lost $800 
million during that period. 
I called the S&P pit just before the opening th at morning, and my clerk said, "Decembers are 
offered at 230, offered at 220, offered at 210, trad ing at 200 even." I yelled, "Cover!" I made a 
quarter of a million dollars on twelve contracts! It  was one of the most memorable trades of my 
life. 
What are your thoughts about program trading? [See Appendix 1 for definition.]  
I hate it. There used to be a natural ebb and flow in the market, but program trading killed it. Those 
firms doing program trading wield extraordinary pow er to move the market , and the locals have 
simply become accomplices. I'm not just paranoid, b ecause I've adjusted to it and been successful. 
But I hate it. 
Some people say that all this criticism of program trading is a bunch of nonsense. 
Well, they are idiots. 
No, some of them are v ery intelligent people. 
No, they are idiots. I can prove to an y one of them that they are idiots. 
How do you prove it? 
There is something I would like the regulators to investigate. The market closes near the high or 
low of the day much more frequently than it used  to. During the last two years, the market has 
closed within 2 percent of the hi gh or low of the day a bout 20 percent of the time. Mathematically, 
that type of distributi on is impossible by chance. 
You talk about program trading as if it is i mmoral. What is unethical about trading stocks 
against futures? 
Because the program traders also have the other si de of the equation to d o. You have the so-called 
Chinese wall in investment banki ng, where they don't want the arbi trageurs and investment bankers 
on the same floor for fear they might talk to each other. Well, I would like the SEC to explain to me 
how they can allow agency program traders sitti ng alongside principal traders for the firm's own 
account. 
Your example introduces an element of frontrunning, which obscures the basic question. 
What I am trying to get at is : What is immoral ab out buying stock and se lling futures (or the 
reverse trade) because prices in the two markets are out of line? 
Because I've seen situations in which a firm ha s information about a debt/equity swap a day ahead 
of time. For example, when the st ate of New Jersey sold  $2 billion worth of st ock and moved it into 
the bonds, this firm knew about it the day before. Si nce they knew they were  going to be selling $2 
billion worth of stock the next day, from 4:00 to 4:15, they sold thousands of futures contracts to 
set up the trade. That stinks. 
The example you just gave is (a) a case of tr ading on inside information, (b) frontrunning, 
and (c) an outright trade. It is  not a program trade. Let me gi ve you an example. Let's say a 
trading firm has a computer program that si gnals when stocks are overpriced or un-
derpriced relative to futures, and they  are not doing any customer business— 
Let me give you an example first. If these broker age firms need an 80-cent discount to take off a 
customer program, they will take off their own position at a 50-cent discount. They have the edge 
and can ran in front of their clients because thei r transaction costs are lower—they're not paying 
commissions to themselves. 
I keep trying to separate these things out.  Let's take an example where there is no 
frontrunning or customer business—just somebody  trading their own money, trying to take 
out an arbitrage profit. If that is their methodology, why is it any worse than your  132methodology? 
Because it is a dumb game. Anybody who puts on a ba sket of stocks to earn 80 basis points above 
the T-bill yield is an idiot! They are the same idio ts I tried to get away from when I left security 
analysis. Who the hell needs to earn 80 basis points over Treasur y bills? The brokerage firms sell 
them this bill of goods because it is a way of cr eating more order flow, which on Wall Street today 
has become the ultimate power. 
Are you saying program trading is wrong, even fo r some entity that is not trading customer 
money? 
I grew up being a security analyst, analyzing thin gs and buying something for value. Trading stocks 
against stock index futures, in a nd out, serves no useful purpose. 
They are buying and selling, and you are buy ing and selling. What's the difference? 
I am trying to earn infinity when I trade. 
What makes that style any more ri ght than the style which is tr ying to arbitrage the market? 
I guess it is their constitutional righ t and they are able to do it, but there are some incredible abuses 
as a consequence. I scream at the kids who work  for these brokerage firms: "You SOBs have no 
integrity, no ethics! You know what will happen? You are going to kill th e game." Now they are 
swearing at me. When they stopped doing proprieta ry program trading they said, "Are you happy? 
You got your wish!" I said, "No, it is not quite fini shed yet." I didn't tell them the conclusion, which 
comes when they are no longer earning $300,000 or mo re a year, and they find out what they are 
really worth; when they are hitting the bricks  and can't get a job for $50,000. Then it will have 
come full circle. 
Speaking of circles, we seem to be moving in on e on this subject. Let's go on. What stands out 
as your most dramatic trading experience? 
The most gut-wrenching time was in November 1982. I had a much smaller net worth then, and I 
took a $600,000 loss in one day. 
What happened? 
It was Election Day, and the Republicans did much be tter than expected in the congressional races. 
The market ran up 43 points, which at that time was one of the largest point advances in history. I 
was short, and like an imbecile, I sold more with the S&P locked at the 500-point limit against me 
and less than an hour left in the trading session. 
My wife, who was working with me at the time, was out that day. The next day she came into 
work, and every ten minutes she would say, "Get smaller, get smaller." I kept taking losses, just 
getting out of the position. 
Whenever you get hit, you are very upset emo tionally. Most traders try to make it back 
immediately; they try to play bi gger. Whenever you try to get all your losses back at once, you are 
most often doomed to fail. That is true in everything—investments, trading, gambling. I learned 
from the crap table at Las Vegas to keep only X do llars in my pocket and never to have any credit, 
because the worst thing you can do is to send good money after bad. If you can physically remove 
yourself from the premises, which is the same thing in futures trading as getting flat, you can see 
things in a whole different perspective. 
After a devastating loss, I always play very sma ll and try to get black i nk, black ink. It's not how 
much money I make, but just get ting my rhythm and confidence bac k. I shrink my size totally—to 
a fifth or a tenth of the position that I trade norm ally. And it works. I think I ended up losing only 
$57,000 in November 1982, after taking a $600,000 hit on November 4. 
Is there any trading mistake that you could isol ate as responsible for that Election Day, 1982, 
loss? 
Adding to shorts when the futures market is al ready locked-limit against you and the cash market 
looks like it is 200 points higher is pretty stupid. 
When you look back, do you say, "Why did I do it?" 
I think because I had huge gains the month before. I've always ha d my biggest setbacks after my 
biggest victories. I was careless.  133Do you still make trading mistakes? By that, I mean deviations from trading principles you 
consider valid—not losing trades. 
You always make trading mistakes. I made one just  recently—a terrible mistake. I was short the 
S&P and short the bonds, and I got nervous be - cause the bonds moved above their moving 
average. However, T-bills had not followed suit. One of my rules is  not to have a position when my 
moving averages in T-bills and bonds diverge—that is, when one moving average is above the 
price and the other below—because interest rate s can't move very far until one confirms the 
movement of the other. According to my rales,  I should have moved my bond position from short 
to flat; instead, I reversed from short to long. I pa id dearly for that mistake. Whereas, I had lost 
only about $20,000 on my original short position, th e next day I had a six-figure loss—my largest 
loss of the year. 
The great thing about being a trad er is that you can always do a much better job. No matter how 
successful you are, you know how many times you sc rew up. Most people, in most careers, are 
busy trying to cover up their mistakes. As a tr ader, you are forced to confront your mistakes 
because the numbers don't lie. 
From time to time, you have alluded to  your trading rules. Can you list them? 
[Reading from a list and extemporizing] I always ch eck my charts and the moving averages prior to 
taking a position. Is the price above or below the m oving average? That works better than any tool I 
have. I try not to go against the movi ng averages; it is self-destructive. 
Has a stock held above its most recent low, when the market has penetrated its most recent low? If 
so, that stock is much healthier than the market. Those are the types of di vergences I always look 
for. 
Before putting on a position always ask, "Do I really want to have this position?" 
After a successful period, take a day off as a reward. I've found it difficult to sustain excellent 
trading for more than two weeks at a time. I've had periods where I can be profitable for twelve 
days in a row, but eventually you just get battle fatigue. So, after a strong run of pr ofits, I try to 
play smaller rather than larger. My biggest lo sses have always followed my largest profits. 
This next rale is a major problem for me; I'm always trying not to break it. The rale: Bottom fishing 
is one of the most expensive forms of gambling. It 's OK to break this rale on occasion if you have 
sufficient justification. For example, today, I bou ght the S&Ps when they were down sharply. Two 
weeks ago, I had written down the number 248.45 as the best entry for the S&P. The low today was 
248.50. Consequently, I was able to buy into weakne ss today and make a good deal of money. I had 
a plan, I carried it out, and it work ed. It doesn't always work. It was risky, but I wasn't pyramiding 
wildly into it, and I kne w how much I was risking. 
That brings me to my next rule: Before ta king a position, always know the amount you are willing 
to lose. Know your "uncle point" and honor it. I have a pain threshold, and if I reach that point, I 
must get out. 
When T-bonds and T-bills differ in respect to thei r individual relationship between price and the 
moving average—one above the moving average, the other below—have no position until one 
confirms the direction of the other. [Generally speaking, a price above its moving average implies a 
price uptrend, while th e reverse case implies a price downtrend.] 
Then, the last words I have at the bottom of  the page are: Work, work, and more work. 
Is there anything to add to that list? 
The most important thing is money manage ment, money management, money management. 
Anybody who is successful will tell you the same thing. 
The one area that I am constantly trying to improve on is to let my gains ran. I'm not able to do that 
well. I'm always working on it. To my dyi ng day, I'll probably still be working on it. 
Is that because you do something wrong? 
I just love to take profits. I hear music when  the cash register rings. The irony is: How can I be 
willing to risk 400 points on the downside and onl y take 200 points of a 1,000-point move on the 
upside? 
On the risk side, you have a method, a plan. Have you experi mented with trying to use  134similar discipline on the profit side? 
Yes, but I haven't been able to perfect it. I have ha d varying degrees of success,  but it is my greatest 
criticism of myself. 
Why the difficulty in this area? 
I think it all relates to my fears of some cataclys mic event. I'm like W. C. Fields: I have several 
bank accounts and a few safe deposit boxes with gol d and cash. I'm extremel y well diversified. My 
thought process is that if I screw up in one place, I'll always have a life preserver someplace else. 
Any other rules you can think of? 
Yes. If you're ever very ner vous about a position overnight, a nd especially over a weekend, and 
you're able to get out at a much better price than you thought possible when the market trades, 
you're usually better off staying with the positio n. For example, the other day I was short the S&P 
and got nervous because the bond market was very  strong on the night session. The next morning, 
the stock market was virtually unchanged. I was so relieved that I could get out without a loss, I 
covered my position. That was a mistake. A little  later that day, the S&P collapsed. When your 
worst fears aren't realized, you pr obably should increase your position. 
What has been your worst drawdown percentage wise? 
My records were just evaluated for a money management deal. Over  my entire career  as a full-time 
trader, based on month-end data, my biggest draw down was 3 percent. I ha d my worst two months 
around the birth of my two children, because I wa s worried about whether I was going to get the 
tennis ball in the right place in Lamaze class. 
My philosophy has always been to  try to be profitable every single month. I even try to be 
profitable every single day. And I've had some extraordinary runs—over 90 percent of my months 
have been profitable. I'm particul arly proud of the fact that, in vi rtually every year, I didn't have a 
losing month before April. I probably don't make as much money as I could because of that, but I'm 
more concerned about controlling the downside. 
You start off every year with a clean slate? 
That's my philosophy: January 1, I'm poor. 
Do you trade smaller in January? 
Not necessarily. It is just that my attention is greater. 
Do you take your losses more quickly in January? 
No, I always take my losses quickly. That is prob ably the key to my success. You can always put 
the trade back on, but if you go fl at, you see things differently. 
Greater clarity? 
Much greater clarity because the pressure you feel when you are in a position that is not working 
puts you in a catatonic state. 
Getting back to managed money, I wonder, after years of making plenty of money trading on 
your own, what possible motive could you have for bothering with managing other people's 
money? 
I felt that I was getting a little stale, and this presents a whole new challenge. Also, after October 
1987,1 realized that downside risk can't be adequa tely measured. The way to get more personal 
leverage is with an outside pool of money. 
How much money are you going to be managing? 
I don't want to be specific about the amount, bu t I'm only taking on one or two large pools of 
money. I don't want to deal with multiple invest ors, even though I'm certain I could raise a great 
deal more money if I went  with a public underwriting. 
The more people you have involved, the more potential headaches. For example, when I met a 
large fund manager, he asked me how many employees  I had. I told him, "None." He told me he 
had seventy. When he wants to qui t, it will be more difficult because  he'll have their lives in his 
hands. I don't want that kind of pressure. 
You seem rather isolated here. Do you like working alone?  135It took me several years to be able to accept wo rking alone. I used to go to a downtown office 
because a lot of my friends were there. But, as  time passed and fewer of those people were still 
there, the attraction diminished significantly. Now, I have half a dozen peopl e I talk to on the phone 
daily. I've taught my methodologies to a number of them, and they have methodologies of their 
own. 
Have you ever tried training people to be traders working for you? 
I hired four people, but nobody lasted. They all becam e intimidated. I tried to  clone myself and it 
didn't work. I taught them all my me thodologies, but learning the intellect ual side is only part of it. 
You can't teach them your stomach. 
Why do most traders lose money? 
Because they would rather lose money than  admit they're wrong. What is the ultimate 
rationalization of a trader in a losing position? "I'll get out when I'm even." Why is getting out even 
so important? Because it protects the ego. I became  a winning trader when I was able to say, "To 
hell with my ego, making money is more important." 
What do you tell people who seek your advice? 
I always try to encourage people that are thinking of going into this business for themselves. I tell 
them, "Think that you might become more successf ul than you ever dreamt, because that's what 
happened to me." I have the freedom  I always wanted, both financially  and structurally. I can go on 
vacation at any moment. I live in Westhampton Beach  half of the year and in New York the other 
half. I have a wonderful lif estyle. My kids think a ll fathers work at home. 
What is the best advice you can give to the or dinary guy trying to become a better trader? 
Learn to take losses. The most im portant thing in making money is not letting your losses get out of 
hand. Also, don't increase your position size until you have doubled or tripled your capital. Most 
people make the mistake of increasing their bets as soon as they start making money. That is a 
quick way to get wiped out. 
Marty Schwartz's story should enco urage those whose initial attempts at trading have met with 
failure. Here is a trader who was unsuccessful over a ten-year period, managing to lose enough 
money to keep himself near broke, despite cons istently earning good salari es. Yet, Schwartz was 
eventually able to turn things around and become one of the world's best traders. 
How did he do it? There were two essential elem ents. First, he found a methodology that worked 
for him. Throughout his losing years, Schwartz used  fundamental analysis to  determine his trades. 
It was not until he immersed himself in technical analysis that he became successful. The point here 
is not that technical analysis is better than fundamental analysis, but  rather that technical analysis 
was the methodology that was right for him. Some of the other traders in terviewed in this book, 
such as James Rogers, have been  very successful using fundament al analysis to the complete 
exclusion of technical analysis. The key lesson is that each trader must find his or her own best 
approach. 
The second element behind Schwartz's transition to success was a change in attitude. As he 
describes it, he became successful  when his desire to win took precedence over his desire to be 
right. 
Risk control is an essential element of Schwartz's trading style, as attested to by his incredibly low 
drawdowns. He achieves this risk control by alwa ys knowing his "uncle poi nt" on any trade. No 
doubt, his approach of sharply reducing position size after large losses, as well as extended winning 
streaks, contributes heavily to his success. The rationale for reducing position size after a 
destabilizing lo ss is apparent. 
However, the reason for taking the same action afte r a winning streak deserves further elaboration. 
As Schwartz explains it, he ha s always experienced his biggest losses after his biggest gains. I 
suspect this is true for the majority of tr aders. Winning streaks lead to complacency, and 
complacency leads to sloppy trading. 
Most traders cite similar rules (s uch as discipline and hard work) as the reasons for their success. 
Therefore, it is always a treat when a top trader provides a rule that is uni que and rings true. I was 
fascinated with Schwartz's observation about ma intaining a position that you are worried about,  136when the market action doesn't justify your fears. The implicit concept is that if the market is 
letting you off the hook eas ily on a position for wh ich there was a basis for fear (such as a 
fundamental development adverse to the position or  a technical breakout in the opposite direction), 
there must be strong underlying forces in favor  of the direction of the original position. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  137 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  138Part III-A Little Bit of Everything  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  139James B. Rogers, Jr.-Buying Value and Selling Hysteria 
Jim Rogers began trading the stock market with  a paltry $600 in 1968. In 1973, he formed the 
Quantum Fund with partner George Soros. The Quantum Fund proved to be one of the best-
performing hedge funds, and in 1980, having amassed a small fortune, Rogers retired. "Retired" is 
the word Rogers uses to describe the manageme nt of his personal portfolio, an endeavor that 
requires considerable ongoing research. His retireme nt also includes teaching investment courses at 
the Columbia University Graduate School of Business. 
I was eager to interview Rogers because of his st ellar reputation as  one of the shrewdest investors 
of our time and because his comments on televi sion financial interview shows and in the print 
media always seemed to strike a note of comm on sense with rare clarit y. Since I did not know 
Rogers, I sent him a letter requesting an inte rview, explaining that I was working on a book on 
great traders. I included a copy of  my previous book on the futures markets, which I inscribed with 
a quotation from Voltaire that I deemed partic ularly appropriate: "Common sense is not so 
common." 
Rogers called a few days later to thank me for the book and to indicate his willingness to 
participate. "However," he cautione d, "I am probably not the person you want to interview. I often 
hold positions for many years. Furthermore, I'm pr obably one of the world's worst traders. I never 
get in at the right time." He was referring to the distinct ion I had made in my le tter, indicating that I 
was interested in great traders rather than great investors. 
As I use the term, a "trader" would be primarily concerned with which dire ction the stock market 
was heading, while an "investor" would concentrat e on selecting stocks w ith the best chance of 
outperforming the market overall. In other words, the investor was always long, while the trader 
might be long or short. I explaine d my use of these terms to Rogers  and stressed that he was indeed 
the type of person I wished to interview. 
I arrived at Rogers' home, a ba ronial, eclectically furnished townhouse, on a fall-like spring 
afternoon. The atmosphere seemed more reminiscen t of a comfortable English manor than a home 
in New York City. In fact, if my only exposure to  New York City was that afternoon's conversation 
with Rogers in his antique-fill ed sitting room, with its pleasa nt views of the Hudson, I would 
conclude that New York City was an eminently peaceful place to live. Af ter greeting me, Rogers 
immediately stated, "I still thin k you have the wrong man." Once again,  he was referring to the fact 
that he did not consider himself to be a trader . This is the note on which the following interview 
begins. 
As I told you in our phone conversation, I don't consider myself a trader. I remember when I went 
to buy German stocks in 1982,1 said to the broker, "I want you to buy me X, Y, and Z stocks." The 
broker, who didn't know me, asked, "What do I do ne xt?" I said, "You buy the stocks and send me 
the confirmations." He asked, "Do you want me to  send you some research?" I said, "Please don't 
do that." He asked, "Do you want  me to send you opinions?" I sa id, "No, no, don't." He asked, "Do 
you want me to call you with prices?" I said, "N o, don't even give me prices, because if you do, 
once I see that these stocks have doubled and tripled, I might be temp ted to sell them. I plan to own 
German stocks for at least three years, because I think you are about to have the biggest bull market 
you've had in two or three generations." Needless  to say, the broker was dumbfounded; he thought I 
was a madman. 
Now I don't consider that trading; it was determining that there was a bout to be a major change in a 
market and taking a position. By the way, I got that  one right. I bought the German stocks at the 
end of 1982 and sold them out in late 1985 and early 1986. 
What made you so bullish on Germany at that time? 
The bull market had started here in August 1982. More important, Germany had not had any kind 
of bull market since the previous all-time high  in 1961, twenty-one years earlier. The German 
market had crumbled in 1962 and had essentially gone sideways since then. In the meantime, the 
German economy had boomed. So there was basic value there. 
Whenever I buy or sell something, I always try to make sure I'm not  going to lose any money first. 
If there is very good value, th en I'm probably not going to lose  much money even if I'm wrong.  140But you could have bought that market ten years earlier on the same theory. 
That's absolutely right. You could have bought it in 1971 for exactly thos e reasons and watched 
German stocks sit for ten years, while we had a major bull market in the U.S. But this time there 
was a catalyst. You always need a catalyst to make  big things happen. At the time, the catalyst was 
the upcoming German elections. I figured the Soci alists were going to be thrown out, and I knew 
that the opposition party, the Christian Democrats, had a platform designed to encourage 
investment. 
My basic assessment was that if the conservative Christian Democrats won the election after having 
been out of power for so many years, they were  going to make major changes. I also knew that 
many German companies were holding back from i nvesting in capital equi pment and expansion in 
1982 in anticipation of a conservative  victory. Therefore, if the c onservatives did win, there would 
be a real explosion of pent-up capital investment. 
Was the election a toss-up at the time? 
Not in my mind. 
I mean in terms of the polls. 
I guess so, because when the conservatives did win, the market exploded flmt same day. 
What if they had lost? 
I still didn't think I would have lost any meaningful money for th e reasons I mentioned before. I 
had every anticipation that there was going to be a major change, and that the bull market would 
last for two, three, or four years. 
It sounds like you have a great deal of  conviction when you put on a trade. 
Yes, I usually do; otherwise, I don't bother doing it. One of the best ra les anybody can learn about 
investing is to do nothing, abso lutely nothing, unless there is something to do. Most people—not 
that I'm better than most people—always have to  be playing; they al ways have to be doing 
something. They make a big play and say, "Boy, am I smart, I just tripled my money." Then they 
rash out and have to do somethi ng else with that money. They can 't just sit there and wait for 
something new to develop. 
Do you always wait for a situation to line up in  your favor? Don't you ever say, "I think this 
market is probably going to go up, so I'll give it a shot"? 
What you just described is a very fast way to the poorhouse. I just wa it until there is money lying in 
the corner, and all I have to do is go over there and pick it up. I do nothing in the meantime. Even 
people who lose money in the market say, "I just lost my money, now I have to do something to 
make it back." No, you don't. You shoul d sit there until you find something. 
Trade as little as possible. 
That is why I don't think of myself as a trad er. I think of myself as  someone who waits for 
something to come along. I wait for a situation that is like the proverbial "shoo ting fish in a barrel." 
Are all your trades fundamentally oriented? 
Yes. Occasionally, however, the Commodity Research Bureau charts will provide a catalyst. 
Sometimes the chart for a market will show an incredible spike either up or down. You will see 
hysteria in the charts. When I see hy steria, I usually like to take a l ook to see if I shouldn't be going 
the other way. 
Can you think of any examples? 
Yes. Two years ago, I went short soybeans after they had gone st raight up to $9.60. The reason I 
remember it so vividly is because that same even ing, I went to dinner with a group of traders, one 
of whom was talking about  all the reasons why he had bought s oybeans. I said, "I really can't tell 
you why all the bullish arguments are wrong; al l I know is that I'm shorting hysteria." 
How do you pick the time to go against the hysteria? 
I wait until the market starts moving in gaps. 
In the midst of it all, or do you wait for so me sign of an end to the move, for example, a 
reversal day?  141No, I don't know about reversal days. 
That brings to mind a classic example of hysteria. In late 1979-early 1980, the gold market 
witnessed an incredible accelerated ad vance. Did you go short that market? 
Yes, I sold gold at $675. 
That was almost $200 too early! 
I told you I'm not a good trader. I'm nearly always too early, but it was only about four days before 
the top. 
I didn't say you were way off timewise, but pricewis e it must have been a pretty scary ride. 
When you do a trade like that, isn't th ere a point where you have second thoughts? 
Yes, when it goes to $676 [he laughs].  
But you stayed with the trade? 
Yes, in that case, because it was chaos. It was something that couldn't last. It was the gold market's 
dying gasp. 
Was that a matter of recognizing the fingerprint of  a market in its final blowoff, or was it a 
matter of gold being overpriced? 
Both. Gold was overpriced, but basically it was— I like your terminology—the "fingerprint" of 
hysteria. Just about every time you go against pa nic, you will be right if you can stick it out. 
So when you see panic, do you automatically go against it? 
The panic, the hysteria, in and of itself is only a cat alyst to make me look to see what is going on. It 
doesn't mean I'm going to do anything. In the case of the early 1980 gold market, I had a view of 
the world that was bearish for gol d. Volcker had just become the Federal Reserve Chairman a few 
months earlier and said that we were going to beat inflation. I believed he meant it. I also happened 
to be bearish on oil at the time, and I knew that  if oil went down, gold would go down as well. 
Was that because you thought gol d and oil should move together,  or because you thought the 
rest of the world believed that? 
At that time, everybody in the world believed that.  
But, did you believe that the relationship was true? 
I knew that it was not true. 
The reason I asked is that I have always felt that the relationship between gold and oil was a 
coincidental correlation. 
Yes, that was all it was. For one very short period of time, gold a nd oil moved together. 
Does that mean you will sometimes do a trade based on a relationship you know doesn't 
really make any sense, simply  because you think that the rest of the world believes it? 
Rarely. I usually like to look at what I think is the fact, th e truth. The main item then was that I 
thought Volcker meant it when he said he was going to break the back of inflation. The fact that oil 
was ready to go down anyway was just the kicker. 
Actually, the decisive step came in Octo ber 1979, when the Fed changed its policy from 
controlling interest rates to controlling money supply growth. Yet the gold market apparently 
didn't believe it, because it went up for several mont hs after that point. In situations like that, 
are the markets too wound up in their hysteria to pay attention to changing fundamentals? 
Absolutely. It is ama/ing how sometimes someth ing important will happen, and the market will 
keep going despite that. Now, I am experienced enough to know that  just because I see something 
doesn't mean that everyone sees it. A lot of peop le are going to keep buying or selling just because 
that has been the thing to do. 
So, just because the market doesn't respond to  some important news, such as the October 
1979 change in Fed policy, doesn't mean that it isn't important. 
All the better. If the market keeps going the way it shouldn't go, especially if it is a hysterical 
blowoff, then you know an opportunity will present itself.  142Can you think of a more recent example? 
Yes, October 1987. October 19 is my birthday, by the way. At the end of 1986 and the beginning of 
1987,1 had predicted that we would have one more  big move up in the stock market and then 
witness the worst bear market since 1937. But I di dn't know it was going to happen on my birthday. 
It was the best birthday present I ever had. 
Did you have any idea that the break could be as large as it was? 
When John Train interviewed me in January 1987,1 told him, "Somewhe re along the way, the 
market is going to go down 300 points in one day."  He looked at me as though I were a madman. I 
envisioned that the Dow would be around 3,000, and 300 points would only be 10 percent. In 1929, 
the market went down 12 percent in one day. Ten percent in one day was not such a big move, 
given the kind of markets we were having then. The market had already seen a number of 3,4, and 
5 percent days. So I said, "Why can't the market go down 300 points in a day?" Little did I know it 
would be 508 points. 
Why did you pick 1937 as a comparison in you r prediction for a st ock market collapse? 
Because in 1937, the Dow went down 49 percent in si x months. What I was trying to say was that 
we were going to have a major, fast, deep, horrible collapse, as opposed to say 1973-1974, when 
the market went down 50 per cent, but it took two years. 
Why did you use 1937 as an analogy as opposed to 1929-1930? 
Because 1929-1930 went on to be a major depression. I knew we were going to have a bear market 
caused by a major financial collapse. I was not c onvinced we were going to  have a depression. I 
was differentiating between a financial and economic collapse. 
Why were you expecting a financial collapse? 
It was the atmosphere. Money wa s flooding the world. Every stock ma rket in the world was at an 
all-time high. You had all these stories of young guys, three years out of school, making half a 
million dollars a year. That is not reality. Whenever  you see that in a market, you are near a top. So, 
I went into the summer positioned for a collapse. 
Were you short stocks or long puts? 
I was short stocks and short calls. I don't buy options. Buying options is another fast way to the 
poorhouse. Someone did a study for the SEC and discove red that 90 percent of all options expire as 
losses. Well, I figured out that if 90 percent of all long option positions lose money, that meant that 
90 percent of all short option positio ns make money. If I want to us e options to be bearish, I sell 
calls. 
When did you cover your positions? 
During the week of October 19. If you remember, by that time, everybody thought that the financial 
structure of America was over. 
Did you cover then because we had hysteria going the other way? 
That is exactly right. That week  was a textbook case of hysteria. U nder those kind of  conditions, if 
you are still solvent, you have to step in there an d go against it. Maybe that was going to be the one 
time it was the end of the world, and I would have been wiped out too. But 95 percent of the time 
when you go against that kind of hysteria, you are going to make money. 
Between October 1987 and January 1988,1 didn't have a ny shorts. That was one of the few times in 
my whole life that I didn't have any shorts. Whet her I am bullish or bearish, I always try to have 
both long and short positions—just in case I'm wrong. Ev en in the best of times, there is always 
somebody fouling up, and even in the worst of times, there is somebody doing well. 
Are you implying that after the collapse, you coul dn't find any stocks you wanted to be short? 
I thought that if I were right a nd the world wasn't coming to an  end right away, everything was 
going to go up—including those stocks that I knew,  fundamentally, were coming apart at the 
seams. In January [ 1988], I started putting a couple of shorts back on, and even though I am losing 
money on one of those shorts, I am happy to do it because I feel more comfortable having the 
protection of some short positions.  143A lot of people blame the October 1987 break on program trading. Do you consider that 
scapegoatism? 
Absolutely. The people who blame it on that do not  understand the market. Politicians and people 
who lose money always look for scapegoats. In 1929, they blamed the cras h on short sellers and 
margin requirements. There were lots of good r easons why the stock market went down. What they 
should focus on is why there were sellers on October 19, but no buyers. 
I remember why I became even more bearish on the weekend before October 19. The week before, 
[Federal Reserve Chairman] Alan Greenspan announ ced that the balance of trade was getting much 
better and things were under control. Two days la ter, the balance of trade figures came out, and 
they were the worst in the history of the world. Right away I said, "This guy is either a fool or a 
liar. He doesn't have any idea what is going on." Then on the w eekend before October 19, you had 
[Treasury Secretary] Baker telling the world we we re going to stick it to the Germans by letting the 
dollar go, because the Germans weren't looseni ng monetary and fiscal policy as Baker had 
demanded. It looked like the trade wa rs of the 1930s all over again. 
I was in a panic—and I was already short! I called Singapore that Sunday night to add to my shorts. 
[Singapore opens earlier than we do.] So all thos e guys who came in on Monday to sell had very, 
very good reasons to sell, and there were no buye rs around. There were no buyers, because there 
was no reason for people to buy. Even the buyers  were scared and bearish that Monday. 
Are you saying the crash was caused by Greenspan and Baker? 
There were a lot of causes: Greenspan, Baker, th e fact that money was ti ght, the steady worsening 
of the balance of trade,  and you had a market that had spiked  up to 2,700 six weeks earlier. If you 
check, you will see that, during 1987, while the S& P and the Dow were going up, the rest of the 
market was quietly eroding awa y. In December 1986,1 shorted the financial stocks, and throughout 
1987,1 didn't lose any money, even though the Dow and the S&P were going through the roof. 
Were there any times you faded hysteria and lost? 
Yes, one of my greatest lessons happened in my early days and taught me about bear markets. In 
January 1970, a time when I still bought options, I took all the m oney I had—which wasn't very 
much—and bought puts. In May 1970, the market caved  in, and the day the market hit bottom, I 
sold my puts. I had tripled my money. I was a geni us! "I'm going to be the next Bernard Baruch," I 
said to myself. 
My plan then was to wait for the market to rally and this time to sell short instead of buying puts so 
that I would make money faster. Sure enough the market rallied, and I took everything I had and 
went short. Needless to say, two months later, I was completely wiped out because I didn't know 
what I was doing. 
One of the stocks I had shorted was Memorex. I sold Memorex at 48. In those days, I didn't have 
the staying power—psychologically, emotionally, and, most important , financially. I ended up 
covering my shorts at 72. Memorex eventually went  to about 96 and then went straight down to 2. 
I was dead right, absolutely, flat-out, perfectly right  to short that stock at 48.1 just ended up getting 
completely wiped out. The market di dn't care that I was dead right. That is one of the reasons that I 
now know about hysteria. 
What did you learn from that particular experience? 
That the market is going to go higher than I th ink it can and lower than I think it will. I had a 
tendency to think that if I knew something, ever ybody knew it. I would just read things in the 
paper; I didn't have any inside information. What  I now know is that they don't know what I know. 
Most people don't have the foresi ght to look six months , one year, or two years out. The Memorex 
experience taught me that anything can happen in the stock market, because there are a lot of 
people in the market who don' t understand what is going on. 
Are you looking for a very pronounced bear market beyond what we have already seen? 
Yes, eventually I expect the market  to break the October 1987 low.  
Do you expect a very deep recession as well? 
Right now [April 1988], I'm still looking mainly for a financial collapse. However, the politicians 
may foul it up and turn it into an economic collapse.  144Can we get a financial collapse without actually having a very serious recession? 
Sure. It has happened lots of times. That is w hy I used 1937 as an example before. I don't expect 
the economy to collapse because as the dollar k eeps getting weaker—which is what I expect—
many parts of the American economy will do well—steel, agriculture, textiles, mining. 
So even if the stock market falls below the Oc tober low, you can still see the economy doing 
well? 
Absolutely. Unless the politicians foul it up.  
By doing what? 
Raising taxes, tariffs, protectionism. There are lots of thi ngs the politicians can do to foul it up, and 
I'm sure they will—they always have. I know we w ill have a financial crisis . And, if the politicians 
get it wrong, we may get an economic collapse as well. 
What is going to trigge r the financial collapse? 
The trade figures will start getting worse again, a nd this will eventually precipitate another dollar 
crisis. 
What do you see as the main cause of the trade deficit? 
The budget deficit, by and large, causes the trade de ficit. You are not going to get rid of the trade 
deficit until you get rid of the budget deficit. 
Given the magnitude of the defici t problem, is there anything that can be done at this point? 
The basic problem in the world to day is that America is consumi ng more than it is saving. You 
need to do everything you can to encourage saving and investment: Eliminate taxation of savings, 
the capital gains tax, and dual taxa tion of dividends; bring back the more attractive incentives for 
IRAs, Keoghs, and 401Ks. At the same time, you need to do everything you can to discourage 
consumption. Change our tax structure to utilize a value added tax, which taxes consumption rather 
than saving and investing. Cut gove rnment spending dramatically—and  there are lots of ways of 
doing it without hurting the econom y too badly. We would have pr oblems, but the problems would 
not be nearly as bad as when they are forced on us. If we don't bite the bullet, then we are going to 
have a 1930s-type collapse. 
Your answer implies that there are relatively painless ways to cut government spending 
"dramatically." Could you provi de some specific examples? 
I'll give you two examples; I could give you a dozen. The U.S. government spends $5 billion a year 
to support the domestic price of sugar so that Americans can pay 22 cents a pound wholesale, when 
it is selling for 8 cents a pound in th e world market. Five billion dolla rs! We would be better off if 
the government told every sugar grower, "We'll gi ve you $100,000 a year for the rest of your life, a 
condominium, and a Porsche if you just get out of the s ugar business." We woul d save billions of 
dollars a year, and the whole count ry would be better off because we would all be paying less for 
sugar. 
If you really want to save a big number, do you know  what our annual balance of trade deficit is? 
One hundred and fifty billion dollars. Do you know wh at it costs us each year to keep American 
troops stationed in Europe? One hundred and fifty billion dollars. American troops were sent there 
as an army of occupation forty- three years ago! Most people in this country weren't even born 
when the decision was made to send our troops to Europe. They ar e doing nothing th ere but sitting 
around, drinking beer, getting fat, and chasing girl s. The GAO has said that we don't have enough 
bullets to fight even a th irty-day war in Europe. Yet it costs us $150 billion a year to keep those 
guys there. I would submit to you that if we stop spending that $150 billion a year and bring those 
troops home, the Europeans would defend themselves. And the kicker is: Do you know who they 
would buy their guns from? They would buy their guns from us, because they don't have a very 
good defense industry establishment. 
But those are very unlikely actions. No politic ians are even talking about those solutions. 
I understand that. With the present cast of je rks in Washington, it is not going to happen. The 
politicians are going to foul things up. They are not going to do what ha s to be done. They are 
going to be more concerned about keeping their vot es and winning the next election. That is going  145to continue until we are forced into solving our  problems. Then it is going to be a disaster. 
If the politicians don't act, do we eventually  face a choice between very  high inflation or a 
deep recession? 
It is going to be an extreme. What I suspect wi ll happen—and I am just speculating, I don't have to 
make this decision yet—is that somewhere along the line a recession will develop. Initially, the 
politicians will say, "We've got to  bite the bullet and suffer through this. This is good for us; it will 
help clean out our system." People are going to buy th at for a while. Then it is going to start to hurt. 
Then it is really going to start to hurt. At that point, the politicians are going to give up, and they 
are going to start to inflate their way out of it. Bu t the only way to inflate your  way out at that point 
is to really print money! 
In that scenario, we start off with a recessi on and end up with very high inflation. 
Right, but we could have wild inflation first and then  deflation. Another very real possibility is that 
we will eventually have exchange controls. Fo rtunately, I don't have to make my investment 
decisions for two or three years forward right now. 
What kind of exchange controls? 
By exchange controls I mean limitations on capit al flows. If you want to go to Europe, you can't 
take more than $1,000. You can't ship money out of  the country without the government's approval. 
What happens to the relative values of currencies in a si tuation like that? 
The dollar disappears. What woul d bring on exchange controls is  the dollar getting weaker and 
weaker. The politicians would then  try to bring in Draconian exch ange controls, which would just 
make the situation worse. 
When you say disappear, are you talking about the dollar becoming like the Argentine peso? 
Why not? Why couldn't it happen? Remember the Civ il War expression, "I don't give a damn about 
a greenback dollar." 
You talk about the collapse of the dollar as if it's an inevitability. 
In 1983, we were the largest creditor nation in the world. In 1985, we became a debtor nation for 
the first time since 1914. By the end of 1987, our fore ign debts were greater than all of the foreign 
debts of every nation sout h of the Rio Grande put together: Brazi l, Mexico, Peru, Argentina, and all 
the rest. 
Can I paraphrase the chain of events you imply as follows: Nothing meaningful will be done 
to change the budget deficit situation. The co ntinued budget deficit will guarantee that the 
trade deficit situation stays bad or even gets worse. That, in turn, guarantees that sooner or 
later, the dollar will come  under extreme pressure. 
Absolutely. That's why I'm not long the dollar.  
How does the bond market fit into this scenario? 
At some point, foreigners are going to stop putting money into this country because of the 
weakening dollar. That means the American public wi ll have to finance the debt. We have only a 3 
to 4 percent savings rate. To get the American public  to finance that debt, interest rates would have 
to be very high. If the Federal Reserve tries to  avoid high rates by printing more money, then the 
dollar just disappears and the Fed loses contro l completely. That is the case where you get 
hyperinflation and 25 to 30 pe rcent interest rates. Either way, we  are going to have high rates. You 
might start out with lower rates first if the politicians decide to bite the bullet by having a recession. 
But then, they will eventually give up and start printing money. 
But, sooner or later, the bond market collapses. 
Absolutely. Sooner or later, we repeat the English experience of not having a long-term bond 
market. But I don't know when sooner or later is. It could be three year s; it could be ten. 
How far did British bonds fall in the situation you are referring to? 
About 70 percent. 
What kind of things do you look at in deciding  which scenario will happen first: deflation or  146inflation? 
Money supply, government deficits, trade deficits , inflation figures, the financial markets, and 
government policy. I look at all those things for the U.S. and key foreign countries as well. It is one 
big, three-dimensional puzzle. However, if you had a three-dimensional puzzle, you could 
eventually put it together. But this puzzle is no t one in which you can spr ead out the pi eces on a 
great big table and put them all together. The picture is always changing. Every day some pieces 
get taken away and others get thrown in. 
While we are on the topic of scenarios, do you have a long-term outlook for gold? 
In 1934, they set the price of gold at $35 an ounce and gold produ ction declined every year 
between 1935 and 1980. Production kept going down b ecause there was no incentive to look for 
gold. During that whole forty-five -year period, the consumption of gold kept going  up, especially 
during the 1960s and 1970s, when we had the elec tronic revolution. Demand got bigger and bigger, 
while at the same time, the supply was going do wn. You would have had a great bull market in 
gold in the 1970s, no matter what. Even  if inflation was at zero perc ent, you still would have had a 
big bull market in gold during the 1970s, because of supply and demand. 
The situation has changed entirely in the 1980s. Th ere is nothing like taki ng the price of gold from 
$35 to $875 to make people go into the gold busi ness. Gold production has gone up every year 
since 1980. Just based on known projections for mi ne openings and expansions, gold production is 
scheduled to go up every year until at least 1995. At the same time, there have been major 
technological advances in the r ecovery processes for gold. In short, there is much more gold 
available than there used to be, and that tr end will continue at least into the mid-1990s. 
I own some gold as an insurance policy, but I don't think gold is go ing to be the great inflation 
hedge of the 1990s that it was in the 1970s, because supply and demand is so different. I don't 
know what the inflation hedge of the 1990s will be  yet, but fortunately, I don't have to decide 
today. 
The supply/demand picture you are painting for gold is obviously negative. But if you put 
that together with a situation in which, us ing your own words, "the dollar disappears," 
wouldn't such an event swamp the int ernal supply/demand balance of gold? 
Certainly, gold may keep its purch asing power. It may do better, it may do worse, but it's not going 
to be the best market. 
In other words, gold was yesterday's inflation hedge. 
Generals always fight the last war. Portfolio mana gers always invest in the last bull market. The 
idea that gold has always been the great store of value is absurd. There have been many times in 
history when gold has lost purchasing power—sometimes for decades. 
I should add something else about gold. Remember  that three-dimensional puzzle I was talking 
about, where there are always pieces being remove d and added. Don't forget South Africa in that 
puzzle. Gold is more complicated because of th e South African situati on. I fully expect South 
Africa to eventually blow up, because I think that  the government has painted itself too far into a 
corner. If there were a revolut ion tomorrow and the blacks took over, the South African whites 
would dump all their gold. So the pr ice would actually go down a lot. 
In a situation like that, I woul d think the price of gold would go up sharply, because of the 
panic related to disruptio ns in mine production. 
While the revolution is going on, the price will go up, but after that, it will go down. The move 
down will completely confuse everybody. They will  ask, "Why is the pric e of gold moving down?" 
But you will want to buy after that move down, because the euphoria of the revolution will also 
bring chaos. 
We have talked about your long-term views fo r the stock market, bonds, currencies, and gold. 
Any thoughts about oil? 
Yes, when the recession hits—and I guarantee it will some day—the price of oil is going to go way 
down. You can put that in writing;  I don't mind saying that. It ce rtainly is goi ng to go under $12. 
Whether that is $11 or $7 or $3,1 don't know. [The price of oil was approximately $16 at the time 
of this interview.]  147Given the general scenario you are talking ab out—the stock market going down, the dollar 
going down, etc.—is there anything that the average guy can do to protect himself? 
Buy European and Far Eastern curren cies; buy Treasury bills; buy farm land. 
How did you first get interested in trading? 
Investing. I stumbled onto Wall Street. In 1964,1 had just finished college and was going on to 
graduate school. I got a summer job through a guy I met, who happened to work for a Wall Street 
firm. I didn't know anything about Wall Street at  the time. I didn't know the difference between 
stocks and bonds. I didn' t even know that there was a difference between stocks and bonds. All I 
knew about Wall Street was that it was somewher e in New York and something unpleasant had 
happened there in 1929. 
After that summer, I went to Oxford durin g 1964-1966. Whereas all the Americans I knew at 
Oxford were interested in politics, I was more interested in reading the Financial Times.  
Were you trading while you were at Oxford? 
Very lightly. I was an odd letter. The money I wa s investing in the market was my scholarship 
money at Oxford. I would get my scholarship money at the beginning of the y ear and invest as long 
as I could. 
Not exactly deep pockets. 
[He laughs] If I had lost much mone y in either of those two years 
So you actually started maki ng money right off the bat? 
Yes, I was making money. That was the bull market  of 1964-1965. By the time I left Oxford in the 
summer of 1966, the bear market had started, but I had already paid off my bills. I was lucky. If I 
had gone to Oxford during 1965-1967,1 proba bly would have gotten wiped out. 
What happened after Oxford? 
I was in the army for a couple of years, and si nce I didn't have any money, I couldn't follow the 
market. In 1968, the day I got out of the army, I went  to work on Wall Street. I invested everything 
I could. My first wife used to say, "We need a TV ." I said, "What do we need a TV for? Let's put 
the money in the market, and we could have ten TVs." She said, "We need a sofa." I said, "We 
could have ten sofas if we just put the money in the market for a little while." 
What kind of job did you get on Wall Street? 
Junior analyst. 
Covering what stocks? 
Machine tools and then advertising agencies. 
Were you investing in the stocks you were covering? 
I invested in anything.  
Successfully? 
I came into the market on August 1,1968, right at the top. But I still had some money left, and in 
January 1970,1 figured out it was going to be a bear  market. I don't know how I figured it out. As I 
mentioned earlier, I took all th e money I had and bought puts. By May, I had tripled my money. In 
July, I started shorting stocks, and by September, I was wiped out. Those first two years were great: 
I went from being a genius to a fool. 
So you were back to ground zero in  September 1970. What happened then? 
I saved everything I had and put it back into the market. I didn't care about a TV or a sofa. The wife 
got rid of me. I was the entrepre neurial spirit personified. Just li ke those guys who build up great 
retail chains, and plow everything back into their stores, I was pl owing everything back into the 
market. 
Were you trading just stocks at this time? 
Bonds, stocks, currencies, commodities. 
When did you get involved in these different markets? 
I traded all of them almost fr om the very beginning. Bonds and stocks from day one. Currencies  148fairly early too. When I was at Ox ford, I kept as much money in dollars as I could, because I knew 
they were going to devalue sterling any day. I kn ew it was coming, and it di d—a year af ter I left. 
Once again, I was a little ear ly. Even then, I had a str ong awareness of currencies. 
In the late 1960s, I also got involved in comm odities by buying gold. In my early years in the 
business, I remember interviewing for a job. The fellow asked me, "What do you read in the Wall 
Street Journal' I said, "One of the first th ings I read is the commodity  page." The guy was stunned, 
because he did too. This was back before commodities were commodities. He offered me a job, and 
when I turned him down, he almo st strangled me. This job inte rview was in 1970, and I was al-
ready trading commodities. 
Going from ground zero in September 1970, wh ere did you start picking up tradingwise to 
build up to your ultimate trading success? 
My early losses taught me a lot. Since then—I don' t like to say this kind of thing—I have made 
very few mistakes. I learned quickly not to do anything unless you know what you are doing. I 
learned that it is better to do nothing and wait until you get a concept so right, and a price so right, 
that even if you are wro ng, it is not going to hurt you. 
Did you have a losing ye ar after that point? 
No. 
How did the Quantum Fund get started? 
George Soros was the senior partne r, and I was the junior partner. We started off with one senior 
partner, one junior part ner, and one secretary. 
How did you know George Soros? 
In 1970, I went to work for him at Amhold and S.  Bleichroeder. We left in 1973 because new 
brokerage firm regulations did not  allow you to get a per centage of the trading profits. We could 
have stayed, but we couldn’t' t have managed mone y. So we had to leave—fortunately. We left and 
started our own firm. 
What kind of trading did you do  for the Quantum Fund? As I understand it, that fund was 
managed differently from the typical fund. 
We invested in stocks, bonds, currencies, co mmodities, everything— long and short—all over the 
world. 
Did you and George make inde pendent trading decisions? 
No. If you broke down the division of labor, he  was the trader and I was the analyst. 
Did you come up with the idea, for example, shor ting the dollar, and did he decide the timing 
of when to do it? 
Yes, sort of. 
What if you disagreed on a market? Usually if we disagreed, we just did nothing. So, you both 
had to agree on a trade to do it?  
There were no rules. Sometimes we would disagree and do the trade anyway, because one of us felt 
more strongly. But that type of scenario rarely came up, since we were usually in agreement, and 
once we worked things through, it was pretty clear that the trade was eith er right or wrong. When 
we thought something through, a consensus was formed. I hate to use that word, because consensus 
investing is a disaster, but we almost  always seemed to come together. 
When you were trading leveraged products such  as commodities and currencies, how did you 
determine what your allocation was? 
Until we ran out of money, we were always leve raged to the hilt. When we bought something and 
ran out of money, we would look at  the portfolio and push out whatev er appeared to  be the least 
attractive item at that point. For example, if you wanted to buy corn a nd ran out of money, you 
either had to stop buying corn or sell something else. It was an amoebic process. You know how 
amoebas grow—they grow out this way, then they run into pressure so th ey grow out the other 
way. It was a very amoebic portfolio.  149You never evaluated the risk of your positions on  an individual basis? So, if you lost money in 
one market and had to reduce your portfolio, you  might just as easily cut back in another 
market? 
Right. We would always cut back on what we thought  were the least attractive positions in the 
portfolio. 
Even today, that sounds like a very unconve ntional fund. Back then, I imagine it was 
probably unique in terms of its investment strategy. 
It certainly was unique. I still don' t know anybody who trades all the markets. By all the markets, I 
mean all the currencies, commodities, bonds, and stocks—long and short—alloverthe world. I am 
retired now, and I still do all these markets. People say to me, "You're retired? We have a full staff 
and can't even keep up with all these markets. What do you mean you ar e retired? You are short 
stocks all over the world!" 
I must admit, I find it amusing when you say you are retired. 
Now in my retirement, I'm more active than anybody, and people say, "How do you follow all these 
things?" 
I have the same question. 
I don't see how you can invest in American st eel without understandi ng what is going on in 
Malaysian palm oil. As I explained before, it is a ll part of a big, three-dimensional puzzle that is 
always changing. 
How do you find enough time to spend on all th ose markets? Just the reading itself seems to 
be a monumental chore. 
I do not do it nearly as ac tively as I used to. Over the years, I have spent a great deal of time 
pouring a lot of stuff into my head. I have devel oped a great deal of pers pective on many markets. 
When I teach, students are always astonished by the range of historical markets that I am familiar 
with. I know about these markets because I have pored over many commodity, bond, and stock 
books so many times, for so many years. As an ex ample, I knew about the great bull market in 
cotton in 1861, when cotton went from \ cent to $1.05. 
How do you find out about a market like that? 
I start by finding the anomalous years in a long-term  historical chart. When  I see a picture like the 
1861 cotton market, I ask myself, "Wha t caused that? Why did that happ en?" Then I try to figure it 
out. From that, you learn an enormous amount. 
In fact, one of the courses I teach  at Columbia, which the kids call "Bulls and Bears," requires each 
student to find a major historical market move. It  doesn't matter which market, or whether the move 
was up or down. My instructions are for them to te ll me what one could have known at the time to 
see the big move coming. When rubber was at 2 cents everyone said, "How can rubber ever go 
up?" Yet it went up twelvefold. Somebody saw it. I al ways ask them, "What c ould you have seen at 
the time?" I always nail them. They will say, "I  knew the market would go up because there was 
going to be a war." But I will make them tell me how they could have known at the time that there 
was a war coming. The course gives them historical  perspective across a broa d spectrum of markets 
and teaches them how to analyze. 
I have lived through or studied hun dreds, possibly even thousands, of bull and bear markets. In 
every bull market, whether it is IBM or oats, the bu lls always seem to come  up with reasons why it 
must go on, and on, and on. I remember hearing hundreds of times, "We are going to run out of 
supply." "This time is going to be  different." "Oil has to sell at  $100 a barrel." "Oil is not a 
commodity [he laughs]." "Gold is different from  every other commodity." Well, damn, for 5,000 
years it has not been different from every other commodity. There have been some periods when 
gold has been very bullish, and other periods when it has gone down for many years. There is 
nothing mystical about it. Sure, it has been a st ore of value, but so has wheat, corn, copper—
everything. All these things have been around for thous ands of years. Some ar e more valuable than 
others, but they are all commodities. They always have been, and they always will be. 
I guess the 1987 stock market is a prime recent example of the "this time is going to be  150different" complacency. 
Right. There was going to be a shortage of stoc ks again. In 1968, one of the major Wall Street 
houses published a great learned th esis on why there was a shortage  of stocks developing, and why 
the bull market had to keep going up for years—ri ght at the top. In 1987, you started hearing it all 
over again: "There is a shortage of stocks, because ever ybody is buying in all this stock." At the 
bottom of the bear market [he begins a laugh that bu ilds steadily] there is going to be a shortage of 
money— I assure you—with a gi gantic surplus of stocks. 
While editing this chapter, I came across the following item in a Time magazine story about the 
incredible bull market on the Tokyo Stock Exch ange (August 8, 1988, p. 29). One could hardly ask 
for a better current example of "this time is going to be different." The subj ect of the Japanese stock 
market actually comes up slightly later in this interview. 
The explosive growth worries some Western fina ncial experts, who fear that the boom could go 
bust. If that happened, investors with heavy losse s in Tokyo could be forced to pull money out of 
other markets, triggering another crash. Japanese st ocks are already trading at astronomical prices 
in comparison with the profits of the companies that issued the shares, at least by American 
standards. On the New York Stock Exchange, such price-earnings ratios run about 15 to 1, while in 
Tokyo the multiples are often four  times as high. Nippon Telegrap h & Telephone trades at 158 
times its earnings. "Japanese authorities have allo wed a speculative bubble to grow," warns George 
Soros, manager of the New York City-based Qu antum Fund, "At no time in the past has a bubble of 
this magnitude been deflated in an orderly manner." 
Such worries are groundless, argue analysts in Tokyo. The Japanese at tribute the high price-
earnings ratios in part to  accounting rules that allow companies to  understate earnings to keep their 
taxes lower. Another factor propping up prices is  so-called cross-holding of stock. Because many 
Japanese companies hold large bloc ks of other companies' stock, wh ich out of tradition are seldom 
traded, fewer shares are available for purchase so their prices rise. 
Is there a lot of similarity between di fferent cases of market hysteria? 
It's always the same cycle. When a market is ve ry low, there comes a time  when some peope buy it 
because it has become undervalued. The market star ts to go up and more pe ople buy because it is a 
fundamentally sound thing to do or because the charts look good. In the next stage, people buy 
because it has been the thing to do. My mother calls me up and says, "Buy me XYZ stock." I ask 
her, "Why?" "Because the stock has tripled," she an swers. Finally, there comes the magical stage: 
People are hysterical to buy, because they know th at the market is going to go up forever, and 
prices exceed any kind of rati onal, logical economic value. 
The whole process then repeats itself on the downside. The mark et gets tremendously overpriced 
and it starts to go down. More people sell because the fundament als are turning poor. As the 
economics deteriorate, more and more people sell. Next, people sell just because it has been the 
thing to do. Everybody knows it is going to go to nothing, so they sell. Then the market reaches the 
hysteria stage and gets very underpriced. That's  when you can buy it for a pop. But for a long-term 
investment, you usually have to wait a few years and let the market base. 
Talking about extreme bull markets, I recently read that Australia sold a l\ acre plot in Tokyo 
for $450 million that they bought for $250,000 twenty-five years ago. Is Japan the tulipmania 
of our day? [During 1634-1636, a sp eculative frenzy in tulips sw ept Holland, causing such an 
enormous rise and collapse in tulip bulb pri ces that the event is still famous today.] 
I guarantee that the Japanese st ock market is going to have a major collapse—possibly within the 
next year or two. Many of our st ocks are going to go down 80 to 90 percent in the bear market. A 
lot more of theirs are going to go down 80 to 90 percent. 
Is there any way the average U.S. trader can take advantage of that? 
Short Japanese stocks, short Japane se indexes, short Japanese call s, buy Japanese puts. A lot of 
Japanese stocks trade here and you can just short them. You can s hort the Japanese index, which 
trades in Singapore and Osaka. Most American br okers can do it for you. There are at least five 
major Japanese corporations which have options  traded on the Chicago Board Options Exchange. 
Although I think a collapse is coming, you have to be very careful about going short Japan, because 
they might change the rales on you at any time.  151I don't know if you remember the Kuwaiti stock market of 1980-1981. In that market, you could 
buy stocks with a postdated check. You could buy $ 10 million worth of stocks with a postdated 
check; you could buy $100 million worth of stock that  way. It didn't matter. Everybody was doing 
it. In the end, there wa s a passport clerk who owned $10 billi on worth of stocks! All of it on 
postdated checks. 
Although that market was a very clear  example of hysteria, I didn't sh ort it. I thought about it that 
long [he snaps fingers]. The reason I didn't go shor t was because I knew when the market caved in, 
they would create rales so that I would never get my money out. Of  course, the market eventually 
collapsed. If I had gone short they would have blam ed it on me and said I caused the damn thing by 
shorting. People were even blaming me for the Oct ober crash last year, becau se I said it was going 
to happen. Some people claim I caus ed oil prices to collapse, beca use I said the price of oil was 
going to go down. I wish I were that influential or powerful. 
To get back to Japan, I have a few Japanese shorts , and I'm going to have more. But whatever I do 
in Japan, I know when the crisis comes, I don't want to be around near the bottom, because the 
Japanese are going to protect themselves. And whatev er they do to protect themselves, it ain't going 
to be good for Jim Rogers. I guarantee that. 
You may not be able to get your money out? 
Yes, they could freeze the currency. They could ha ve three different tiers of currency. God knows 
what they will do. 
Wouldn't you be protected if you were short a Japanese market that traded on an American 
exchange like the СВОЕ ? 
Suppose they create two levels of  currencies and the guy on the other side of the trade can't meet 
his obligation. 
The clearinghouse is responsible. 
OK, fine, I'm happy to hear it. That 's the best news I've had in a long time. Still, whatever I do, I'm 
going to be careful. If the Japanese stock market goes from 30,000 to 24,000 or 20,000 that's fine. 
But you better think about getting out of it before the last b it if it goes to 12,000. If you wait that 
long, you may get your profits out, but it is going to be very painful. 
Why did you leave the Quantum Fund? 
I didn't want to do the same thing for the rest of my life. I always wanted to have more than one 
career. When I came to New York in 1968,1 was a poor boy from Alabama. By 1979,1 had made 
more money than I knew existed in the world. Also, we were getting very big. We had started with 
three people, and by 1979, we had fifteen people. They wanted to know when they could go on 
vacation, get raises, etc. I wasn't interested in any of that; I was interested in investing. I didn't want 
to get bigger. 
In September 1979,1 decided it would be my last year. But then, in Oct ober, there was a big 
collapse in the stock market, which we sailed right through. It was so much fun that I decided to 
stay on one more year. I left in 1980. 
Was 1980 the start of your "retirement"? 
Yes, in 1980,1 just cashed in my chips and retired. 
Is that the point you became an independent trader? 
The term I really prefer is "unemployed." 
Well, you teach at Columbia. 
That's unemployed. I did it as a part-time thing starting in 1983 so that  I could play squash. 
I thought it was the love of teaching. 
It has developed into much more. But when I starte d out, I didn't even want to teach. I just wanted 
to learn how to play squash. 
You're not being facetious? You actually started teaching so you could play squash? 
I'm dead serious. Columbia is right here and the D ean kept pestering me to teach a course. I told 
him, "I don't think people should go to business school." I thought that, for many people, business  152school was a waste of time. I stil l think so. But one thing I wanted  to learn in my retirement was 
how to play squash. So I made a deal with the Dean to teach one course per semester for free, in 
return for lifetime access to the Columbia gym. He agreed. I thought I got a great deal, but he was 
smarter than I was—I'm still teaching. 
I take it, at this point, you really enjoy it. 
Oh, it's good fun, yes. And Columbia is terrific.  
What courses are you teaching? 
Security analysis, investment analysis, and the "B ulls and Bears" course we talked about before. 
Of the multitude of your trading experiences, do any stand out as particularly dramatic? 
Lots. My October 19 birthday present that I talk ed about earlier was proba bly the best. August 1982 
is another. I put a gigantic part of my net worth into bon ds throughout 1981 and 1982, and in 
August 1982, they skyrocketed. 
Any negative dramatic experiences? 
August 1971 was a very exciting time. We were long Japan and short America, and one Sunday 
night, Nixon announced that he was taking America off the gold standard. I didn't even know it had 
happened. I had been off somewhere on my moto rcycle, and I came in Monday morning without 
having read the papers. That week the Japanese stock market went down 20 percent, and the U.S. 
stock market went up. We were  losing heavily on both sides. 
Did you have to liquidate your positions right off the bat? 
You can't liquidate at a time like that. Who can you sell to in Ja pan? Who could you buy from in 
the U.S.? If you covered your shorts, you made things  worse. In a situati on like that, you have to 
figure out whether you are right or  wrong. If there was going to be  a major fundamental change 
forever, the first loss is the be st loss. But if fundamentally you are basically correct, then you do 
nothing but sit there and let the market hysteria wash around you. 
Did you stay with your positions? 
Yes. 
So, you really had to ride out a rather treacherous paper loss. 
There is no such thing as a paper loss . A paper loss is a very real loss. 
What was the analysis that gave you the confidence to stay with your positions? 
Our analysis was that this was not the end of the world. America had simply taken a short-term 
step, and it was not going to solve our country's long-term problems. 
Did that position actually turn out to be OK?    
It turned out fine. The Nixon announcement was ju st another step in the dissolution of the Bretton 
Woods Agreement [a 1944 international pact that, among ot her things, established guidelines for 
foreign exchange rate stabilization] and the decline of America. America was rallying in its own 
bear market. 
So, you saw it as a cosmetic move that wasn't going to change the trend, and you stayed with 
your position. 
Right. 
Is that a general principle: When government  measures are implemented to counteract a 
trend, you should sell the rally after the government action? 
Absolutely. It should be written down as an axiom that you always in vest against the central banks. 
When the central banks try to pr op up a currency, go the other way. 
What is the biggest public falla cy regarding market behavior? 
That the market is always right. The market is  nearly always wrong. I can assure you of that. 
What else? 
Never, ever, follow conventional wisdom in the ma rket. You have to lear n to go counter to the 
markets. You have to learn how to  think for yourself; to be able to see that the emperor has no  153clothes. Most people can't do it. Most people want to follow a tr end. "The trend is your friend." 
Maybe that is valid for a few mi nutes in Chicago, but for the most  part, following what everyone 
else is doing is rarely a way to get rich. You may make money that way for a while, but keeping it 
is very hard. 
But actually, your whole style of trading involves staying with a t rend for years. So isn't what 
you are saying contradictory? 
That kind of trend—a trend that is economically  justified—is different. You have to see the 
supply/demand balance change earl y, buy early, and only buy markets that are going to go on for 
years. By "trend following," I meant buying a market  just because it goes up and selling it just be-
cause it goes down. 
What trading rules do you live by? 
Look for hysteria to see if you shouldn't go the opposite way, but  don't go the opposite way until 
you have fully examined the situation. Also, rememb er that the world is always changing. Be aware 
of change. Buy change. You should be willing to  buy or sell anything. So many people say, "I 
could never buy that kind of stock," "I could neve r buy utilities," "I could never play commodities." 
You should be flexible and al ert to investing in anything. 
If you were counseling the average investor, what would you tell him? 
Don't do anything until you know wh at you are doing. If you make 50 percent two years in a row 
and then lose 50 percent in the th ird year, you would actually be wors e off than if you just put your 
money in a money market fund. Wait for somethi ng to come along that you know is right. Then 
take your profit, put it back in the money mark et fund, and just wait agai n. You will come out way 
ahead of everybody else. 
Are you ever wrong on a major position play? That  is, are one of your almost sure shots ever 
wrong, or are they so well selected that they just invariably go? 
I don't want to make it sound like I don't know how  to lose money—because I know how to lose 
money better than most people—but there has not been a major mistake in a long time. But you 
have to remember that I don't tr ade that often. It is not as though I'm ma king three decisions a 
month. I may make three decisions a year, or fi ve decisions a year, a nd I'll stay with them. 
How often do you make a trade? 
Well, there is a difference between making a trad e and deciding to buy bonds  in 1981. I've owned 
bonds since 1981, but I sell around the position. I ma ke trades, but basically  I own them. I went 
short the dollar at the en d of 1984. Now, I have made a fair amount  of trades in currencies since the 
end of 1984, but it is basically one tr ade with a lot of trades around it. 
Very few investors or traders are as successful  as you have been over time. What makes you 
different? 
I don't play. I just don't play. 
I can understand that. But still, very few peop le can analyze the same fundamentals you are 
looking at and so consistently be correct in assessing all the variables. 
Just don't do anything until you kn ow you've got it right. As an example, until you see American 
agriculture hit a lo w, then no matter what happens in th e world—unless the world is going to stop 
eating—you can't go wrong. American agriculture is now so competitive, and so many marginal 
farmers have been washed out, that it has to go up. You just watch American agriculture 
deteriorate, deteriorate, deteri orate, and then you buy. You may buy early or late. In my case, 
usually a little bit early. Bu t, so what? The worst that ha ppens is you bought it too early. Who 
cares? 
Is there anything else besides the fact that you  are very selective that sets you apart? 
I have no boundaries. I am totally flexible. I am open to everything, and I pursue everything. I have 
no more compunction about speculating in Singapore dollars or shorting Malaysian palm oil than I 
do about buying General Motors. 
What happens when you have one scenario fo r currencies, one for the stock market, one for  154the bond market, and not everything meshes? 
Then I won't do anything. It happens all the ti me. I don't do anything until all the pieces fit. 
What is your opinion about chart reading? 
I haven't met a rich technician. Excluding, of course, technicians w ho sell their technical services 
and make a lot of money. 
Do you use charts yourself? 
Yes, I look at them every week. I use them fo r knowledge, to see what is going on. I learn a lot 
about what is going on in th e world by looking at charts. 
But you don't ever look at charts and say, "I've seen this type of pattern before and it usually 
means the market is topping." 
I look at charts to see what has happened.  
Not what will happen? 
What has happened. If you don't know what has ha ppened, you'll never know what is going to 
happen. The charts say to me that there is a runaway bull market. They give me facts, but that's it. I 
don't say—what is that term you used  earlier, reversal?—th ere is a reversal he re. I don't even know 
what a reversal is. 
A reversal simply is— 
Don't tell me. It might mess up my mind. I don't know  about those things, and I don't want to know. 
Do the markets behave any differently now b ecause so much money is being managed by 
trend-oriented systems? 
No. They may not always have been on a comput er, but there always have been systems. I 
guarantee that you can go back 100 y ears in the market and not find a single decade where there 
hasn't been some kind of system, some kind of  new formula developed to play the markets. 
So the markets today are basi cally the same as the market s in the 1970s, 1960s, and 1950s. 
The same as the markets in the nineteenth centu ry. The same things make markets go up and down. 
They have not changed the rules of supply and demand. 
Do you have any goals at this point? 
I'm looking for adventure. I'd like to be able to  wean myself more and more from the markets. 
There are two problems. First, investing is such a wonderful pastime that it is hard to give up. I 
haven't changed from when I was twenty-two y ears old. I always want ed to read and know 
everything that was going on and figure out the futu re. The second problem is what do I do with my 
funds if I just stop? If I turn it  over to my friendly broker at XYZ, I would be broke in five years, 
and then I would have to go back to work. 
Any last words? 
Good investing is really just common sense. But it is astonishing how few people have common 
sense—how many people can look at the exact same  scenario, the exact same facts and not see 
what is going to happen. Ninety percent of th em will focus on the same thing, but the good inves-
tor—or trader, to use your term—will see some thing else. The ability to get away from 
conventional wisdom is not very common. 
 
Jim Rogers' unique approach may be difficult to emulate in its entirety, but many of his trading 
principles are of great relevance to all traders. His basic concepts are: 
1. Buy value. If you buy value, you will not lose much even if your timing is wrong. 
2. Wait for a catalyst. Bottoming markets can go nowhere for ve ry long periods of time. To avoid 
tying up your money in a dead market, wait until there is a catalyst to change the market direction. 
3. Sell hysteria. This principle is sound, but its applica tion is far from easy. Rogers' methodology 
can be paraphrased as follows: Wait for hysteria, examine to see whether the market is wrong, go 
against the hysteria if fundamenta lly validated, be sure you are right, and then hold on tight. The 
tricky parts are the last two steps.  Very few traders have Rogers' analytical skills and intuitive 
insights to wade through the maze of facts and stat istics in the "three-dimensional puzzle" of world  155markets and arrive at the correct long- term projections with uncanny high ac 
curacy. Without this type of accuracy, the ability to  sit tight could be a lethal virtue. And, even if 
you can predict long-term economic trends with a su fficient degree of accura cy, there still remains 
the problem of being able to sit tight, particularly when the financial steamroller of market hysteria 
is running counter to your position. 
For example, I doubt many traders would have been able to sell  gold at $675, stay short while it 
surged to $875 in only four days, and then ho ld the position through the subsequent long-term 
collapse, eventually liquidating at a large profit. Even if you have the steel nerves necessary to 
duplicate this feat, you probably lack the financial resources to outstay  this type of market or the 
same high degree of accuracy in picking your shot s. Perhaps this particul ar concept should come 
with a caution label attached: Warning! Any atte mpts by the unskilled practitioner to apply the 
method described herein can lead to financial ruin. 
4. Be very selective. Wait for the right trade to come along. Ne ver trade for trading's sake. Have the 
patience to sit on your money until the high probability trade sets up exactly right. 
5. Be flexible. Biases against certain markets or types of trades limit your field of opportunity. A 
trader who says, "I will never go short," has a distinct disadvantage compared to the trader who is 
willing to go short as well as long. The trader who is open to examining a broad range of markets 
has a distinct advantage over someone who is willing to participate in only one market.  
6. Never follow conventional wisdom. Keep this principle in mi nd and you will be less likely to buy 
stocks after the Dow has already moved from 1, 000 to 2,600 and everyone is  convinced that there 
is a shortage of stocks. 
7. Know when to hold and when to  liquidate a losing position. If you believe the market is going 
against you because your orig inal analysis was flawed (such as  when you realize you overlooked an 
important fundamental factor), then  as Rogers states: "T he first loss is the best loss." However, if 
the market is going against you, but you are convinced your original analysis wa s right, then sit out 
the hysteria. As a cautionary word, th is latter condition s hould be applied only by traders who fully 
understand the risks involved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  156Mark Weinstein-High-Percentage Trader 
After a brief period as a real es tate broker, Mark Weinstein becam e a full-time trader. His start in 
trading was so naive that he vi rtually threw his money away. Afte r that early failure, Weinstein 
withdrew to seriously study the ma rkets and earn another trading st ake. With the exception of one 
disastrous trading experience, Weinstein was a successful trader  from that point on. He has 
intensively traded a wide variety of markets, in cluding stocks, stock options, stock index futures, 
currencies, and commodities. Although he is reluctant to divulge specifi c details, it is clear that he 
has profited handsomely in all these trading arenas. 
I met Mark Weinstein through a mutual friend. A lthough he was very intrigued by the project, his 
desire for anonymity made him reluctant to tell hi s story. He would call me and say, "OK, I will do 
it, let's schedule the interview." Then the next day he would call and say, "I changed my mind. I 
don't want the publicity." This pattern was repeat ed several times, with each decision accompanied 
by lengthy phone conversations regarding the merits and drawbacks of doing the interview. Finally, 
in exasperation, I said, "Mark, we  could have done three intervie ws in the time we have spent 
talking about it." That was our last conversation regarding the matter until about two months later 
when, impressed by the caliber of traders who had agreed to part icipate in this book, Weinstein 
decided to do the interview. 
Weinstein met me at my office one summer ev ening. Because the building turns off the air-
conditioning after 5:00 P.M., we were forced out into a corner  lobby, which, although warm, was at 
least less stifling. The interview was conducted over  a dinner of deli sandwi ches and soda. Through 
our phone conversations, I knew Weinstein had a str ong tendency to go off in many directions in 
any conversation—that's how his mind works, one topi c leads him to think of five others and their 
various interrelations. Dreading a mammoth editing task, I stressed to Weinstein the need for 
remaining focused on the specific questions. I could te ll that Weinstein was making an extra effort 
to heed this advice. This fact  notwithstanding, the in terview lasted five hours and yielded a 200-
page transcript. 
How did you first get involved in trading? 
Back in 1972, when I was a real estate broker, I had a friend who was a commodity broker. He and 
I had gone to school together. 
Did your friend get you interested in the markets? 
It didn't take much to get me interested be cause my father's hobby was gambling. He was very 
good at percentages, and I used to watch him at the cr ap tables. In a sense, I think being a trader is 
in my genes. Also, trading fascinated me becau se of my mathematics and science background in 
college and because I had a commodity broker  friend who was into computer strategies. 
Do you remember your first trade? 
I remember it exactly. I opened up a commodity account with $8,400, and I went long corn based 
on a recommendation made by the firm's grain an alyst. Three days later, I was out $7,800. 
Did your broker friend advise you to follow the analyst's recommendation? 
Yes, and he also followed it. What I didn't realize then was that the market had been rising for some 
time and was already overbought when  I went long. It wasn't even a bad reaction. I just got in on 
the move too late. I didn't have enough margin to  keep the position going. Also, my guts turned on 
me, and I didn't want to put up any more money. 
It sounds to me like your friend let you put on a position that was clearly out of line with any 
money management principles. 
It was one of those get-rich-quick schemes. 
Did you know anything abou t the markets at the time? 
Absolutely nothing. If I flipped th rough a chart book, it looked like a co llection of TV test patterns 
to me. 
Did you have any idea of the risk involved? 
I knew that the chances of my winning were ve ry slim because I didn't know what I was doing.  157Didn't it occur to you that you should  learn something before you started? 
No, because I was desperate for a change; I didn't like being a real estate broker. 
Was the money that you invested a substa ntial part of your savings at the time? 
It was all the money I had. 
When did you get enough money to  come back into the markets? 
It took me approximately six or seven months. I worked seven days a week and rented as many 
apartments as I could get my hands on. I also sold  a few co-ops. By that time, I had saved up about 
$24,000.1 took out $4,000 to live on, and used the remaining $20,000 to open an account. 
Did you make any effort to learn anythi ng about the markets in the interim? 
Yes. I studied the gold market, learned how to chart, and became familiar with the concept of 
overbought and oversold markets. I figured that if  I bought a severely overs old market and left 
myself enough money for two margin calls, I coul dn't lose unless something drastic happened in 
the economy. That was my method. 
But if you use that approach in a trendi ng market, you are going to get killed. 
It worked in that market. I guess ignorance was bliss.  
What were your trading results the second time around? 
I did well for several years after that and managed to bu ild a small fortune. But a lot of that was due 
to luck. 
It couldn't have all been luck. What were you doing right when you were making money? 
In relation to what I know now, there was very little that I was doing right. I think I just had good 
markets. In those days, commodities seemed to fo llow chart patterns a lot better than they do now. 
Very few people knew anything about technical an alysis then, so the markets were much more 
orderly. I got a break by learning as  much as I could about technical analysis at a time when it was 
working pretty well. 
Did you have a method for controlling risk?  
No, and I still don't. I depended on my nervous syst em and gut reaction. I covered positions when I 
did not feel right about them. Sometimes it would be after two days; sometimes after two hours. 
Were you spending all day trading? 
All day and all night. I was losing friends left a nd right. I sat in a studio apartment with charts 
plastered on every wall. I pr obably looked like a madman to  the friends I had left. 
So this was really a full-time endeavor. 
Not only an endeavor—it was an ob session! I slept with it; I dreamt about it. Sometimes I would 
stay up all night thinking about what I would do th e next day. If I didn't need sleep, I would have 
done it twenty-four hours a day. At that point, it wa sn't the money that was motivating me. I was 
hooked on the game: on the challenge of trying to figure out the market. 
Did you sometimes wake up with a feeling that you knew the gold market was going higher or 
anything like that? 
No, it had nothing to do with the di rection of the market. It was just an extension of what I was 
doing during the day. I would take so  much of it to sleep that I ended up exploring unconsciously 
what I had been doing consciously that day. 
Did you have any goals when you set out? 
Well, the great American dream is to make a million dollars, and that was particularly true in those 
days. I never really had a materialistic dream unt il I started vacationing and traveling in Europe. 
When was this? How many years after you started trading? 
It was in the mid-1970s. I had been trad ing for about three or four years.  
Had you passed the million do llar mark by that point? 
Yes, and I had made enough money to be able to relax, start vacationing, a nd think about things I 
wanted to buy. At that point, I was feeling conf ident enough to know that I could replace the money  158I spent with my trading profits. I figured the next logical step was to start appreciating the money I 
was making. I saw a castle in the south of France th at I wanted. I was partic ularly impressed that 
the castle had a moat around it, and the idea of living there appealed to me. It  was on the market for 
only $350,000, and I figured it would take about $50,000 a year to keep it up. 
That doesn't sound like a lo t of money for a castle. 
Today it is probably worth $5 million. When I came b ack to the U.S., I wanted to make the money 
to pay for the castle almost immediately. That was a tremendous mistake. 
I don't understand. You already had the money to buy the castle; you didn't have to make it. 
Even though I had the money, I still looked at it in terms of how much it cost. I know people in this 
business who have $17 million in their tr ading account and won't buy a new car. 
So you didn't take your money out of the account to buy the castle. 
No, I came back and decided that making the money was going to be my goal. 
In other words, your next $350,000 in pr ofits was going to go for the castle. 
Exactly. 
What happened? 
On my next trade, I put on a large long position in  soybeans. The market closed up the first day, 
and I had about a 25 percent profit on my money. I was planning to get out of the position at the 
end of the week. The biggest mistake I made was ha ving a specific target of what I wanted out of 
the trade. 
The target being determined not by market analysis, but rather by the $350,000 you wanted 
to make on the trade. Did you trade differently because you were trying to make money for a 
specific purpose? 
Yes, I didn't consider the risk and took on too large a position. I wa s not using any type of rational 
judgment. I was being guided by my material desire s. The market went up again the next day, but 
collapsed suddenly late in the session, locking limit-down. 
Did you get stuck with your position at limit-down? 
Yes, I couldn't get out. The next day I showed up at the brokerage office and the market opened 
offered limit-down. I waited all day to see if it would come off of locked limit-down, but it didn't. 
I take it that you would have liquida ted your position if you could have. 
If the market had traded, I would have sold out at any price.  
Do you remember your emotions at the time? 
I was in a state of shock and had no decision-m aking capability left whatsoever. I couldn't fall 
asleep, and found myself almost praying the mark et would somehow trade the next day. On the 
third day, I called the office about a half an hour before the opening, and they told me it didn't look 
like there was any hope. I didn't even bother going in because I couldn't face the people in the 
office. I was certain that they were ge tting a big thrill out of my situation. 
Why is that? 
There were a few other professiona l traders in the office who were never able to make the kind of 
money I had been making. When this situation devel oped, they were almost relieved. It seemed to 
justify all those years of their not taking positions like I did. They were really heartless. The only 
person who was really upset was my broker, and, fr ankly, that was probably because he was afraid 
of losing the account. 
Did the other traders kid you about it? 
They over consoled me and then laughed about it behind my back. They wanted to see me come in 
and fall apart. That is why I stopped coming to the office. 
Do you think they relished your predicament because it made th em seem less deficient as 
traders? 
It went beyond that. I think there are a lot of people in this busi ness who just enjoy watching others 
lose money.  159Once you stopped going into the office, what did you do during the day? 
I checked with other brokerage hous es, trying to get price quotes.  
Why didn't you just call your ow n broker? I was too embarrassed,  and I didn't want to take 
the derision. Your own broker was kidding you?  
I didn't know what to think of him. I was starting to get paranoid and hostile because nothing could 
be done. I went to a competing firm and spoke to their grains analyst. I was looking for someone to 
hold my hand. He told me I would be OK, becaus e the fundamentals were still strong and there 
would be a tremendous demand for soybeans if the market went down another day. Of course, on 
the fourth day, the market  locked limit-down again. 
How much were you losing each day? 
About $ 125 thousand a day. This  was at a time when the av erage annual salary was $15,000.1 was 
not born rich, and I couldn't stop thi nking of my loss in those terms. 
Could you put that loss in perspect ive relative to your account size? 
Before that trade, I had nearly $1.5 million in my  trading account. So I wa s losing nearly 10 percent 
of my equity level prior to the trade each day. 
I was devastated. I felt like I was wounded in a trench and watc hing myself bleed to death. The 
market went limit-down five days in a row, and I lost over $600,000. On the fifth day, I remember 
sitting in a park holding hands with a girl I had picked up, li terally crying on her lap. I was 
practically in a psychotic state. I thought about getting out of the business altogether . I started to 
think that what everybody was telling me was true—m aybe it was just luck that I had made money 
all those years. I worried that if  I continued trading, I could wind up losing it a ll, and being forced 
to go back to some job I didn't like. 
Which was more devastating, the large monetary  loss, or your feelings about going from 
success to failure? 
It was the money and the limit situation, and the fact that I couldn't act. My exact thoughts were: 
Here I am, a person who thought it was un-American to go short, and what  I found out was really 
un-American was not being able to get out of a position. 
So you felt cheated by not being able to get out? 
I definitely felt cheated. To this day, I think there is something wrong with limit price moves. 
Are you implying that price lim its that were supposedly created to  protect the public actually 
work against them by preventi ng people from getting out of their losing positions? 
Yes. I think the market should be totally free of restraints. 
There is talk about putting limits on stock mark ets as a way of reducing volatility. Would that 
actually be jumping from the frying pan into the fire? 
Absolutely. Now, the average invest or knows that if he wants to get out, he can at l east get out at 
some price. Imagine if this guy calls his broker and finds out that  he can't even get out of the 
market. 
In other words, you are saying that those who are expounding the idea of limits are really 
going to make matters worse for the small investor. 
It is absolute lunacy. It is a la w that is being proposed for the be nefit of sophistic ated institutional 
investors. 
Your earlier comment implied that, prior to th e soybean trade, you always traded the long 
side of the markets. Is that right? 
Yes. I never went short. I felt it was un-America n. After the soybean trade,  I realized that the 
business I was in was the height of capitalism, and it really made no difference what side of the 
market you were on. All I could think about was that  the people who were short made money and I 
lost money. 
How long did the emotional impact of this experience last? 
Months. I didn't want to trade commodities anymore.  I ripped every chart off my walls. I tore up 
everything in my house that had anything to do with commodities.  160When did you begin trading again? 
After a few months, I started tr ading AMEX stocks, but I found it  amazingly slow. I missed the 
leverage of the commodity markets. I didn't th ink I could successfully support myself trading 
stocks. 
Around that time, I ran into a friend  who is a great options trader. I told him about my experiences 
and he suggested that I join him. In my first we ek at his office he told  me to buy Teledyne calls 
right before expiration because he was sure they  were going up. I followed hi s advice, and the calls 
completely collapsed. 
How much did you lose? 
About $40,000.1 felt extremely hostile, but I didn't want  to show it because he never promised me 
any results. I was so upset that I walked out of the office and didn't come back for two days. He 
tried reaching me during that time, but I didn't re turn his calls. Finally, he  got a message to me 
through a mutual friend. 
Was he upset that he had given you bad advice? 
When I came back to the office, he told me th at he had done the exact opposite trade in another 
account, and that the trade was mine. So I didn't really lose any money. 
That sounds like an awfully odd type of practical joke. 
It wasn't a practical joke. He was trying to teach me not to place blind trust in anyone—even him. It 
was his way of teaching me the importance  of self-reliance in being a good trader. 
How did you do after that point? 
I did pretty well. My friend was a phenomenal op tions trader. He knew ever ything about the market 
and I learned a tremendous amount from him. 
Did you trade options based on th e methodologies he taught you? 
Yes, combined with my own technical analysis.  
Your friend didn't use technical analysis? 
No, he didn't believe in it . He was a tape reader. 
Has the fact that you have been extraordinarily  successful as a 100 p ercent technical trader 
changed his mind about technical analysis? 
Not at all. He thinks technical analysis is just a crutch for me, and the real reason I make money is 
experience. There was a point at which we separated for a few year s. He came to my office one day 
and watched me trade. He embraced me like a father and said, "You finally made it." I told him that 
not only had I gained a lot of experience, but I had learned just about everything there was about 
technical analysis, including certain things I had created myself. He said, "You never give up, do 
you? It has nothing to do with t echnical analysis. You are trading that way because of experience." 
Why did you and your option trad ing friend eventually separate? 
There was a conflict in our tradin g styles. He was a great trader  who was willing to take an 
occasional large loss, because he knew he would more than make up for it with large gains and 
come out way ahead in the long ran. However, I was uncomfortable trading that way. I preferred 
trading for small profits and trying to eradicate losi ng trades. I wasn't willing to take the same type 
of risk. Also, my approach was purely technical, whereas he was basically a tape reader. Anyway, 
in 1980,1 decided to go off on my own. We  got together again years later. 
I know you once entered an options trading contest. Can you tell me about it? 
It was originally organized by two traders on the СВОЕ  floor. They got 47 traders together, each of 
whom put up $5,000 in a winner-take -all contest. Each trader opened a $100,000 account with the 
same clearing firm. 
How long was the contest for? 
Three months. 
What were your results? 
I turned the $100,000 into over $900,000 without any pyramiding [using profits to increase  161leverage]. 
That's a rather phenomenal performance. 
Yes, but the markets were very good at that time. 
What did you trade when you went out on your own in 1980? 
I traded everything. I continued to  trade stock options. When stock index futures trading began in 
the early 1980s, that became a primary market for me . I also traded the comm odity markets. In fact, 
during the last two years, my trading has shifted to nearly 90 percent commodities. 
Do you remember your first soybean tr ade after the debacle in the 1970s? 
For a long time, I avoided soybeans.  But, as I began to find myse lf trading the commodity markets 
effortlessly, I knew deep down that I would eventu ally get back the money I lost in soybeans. I 
never forgot about it. 
It sounds like you were looking for revenge. 
Yes, exactly. Every time I looked at a commodity  chart book, my eyes would edge over to the 
soybean chart, then I would quickly flip the pa ge. I watched the market peripherally for years 
before doing anything. When soybeans went do wn to $4.75,1 knew they were near a low, but I 
didn't want to buy them until I was sure I couldn't lo se on the trade. I was lik e a Sicilian whose wife 
had been murdered ten years earlier, waiting for the perfect moment for revenge. When my 
technical analysis convinced me that the market  had bottomed for real, I jumped in on the long 
side. 
Where did you buy the beans? 
Around $6.18. [This was shortly before the 1988 drought caused prices to skyrocket.] 
Where did you get out? 
I got out of some at $7.25, and the rest at $9.92. [The high of the move was $10.46.] 
How much did you make on that trade? 
Let's just say I made my money back in spades. 
The way you talk about it, it sounds like  that trade was a great relief for you. 
Yes, it was a total catharsis. I realized that there was a reason why I had lost the money in the first 
place. 
What was the reason? 
Because I was inexperienced. I don't believe anyone ever gets wiped out in the market because of 
bad luck; there is always some other reason for it.  Either you were off when you did the trade, or 
you didn't have the experience. There is always a mistake involved. 
You mentioned earlier that one of the reasons you split with your form er trading partner was 
that your own trading style was geared to extr emely low risk. Since 1980, what was the worst 
percentage drawdown you  have experienced? 
I lose so infrequently that I don't really  keep track of that type of number. 
Well, let's put it this way: What was your worst single trading month? 
I haven't had any losing months. 
You have made money in every single month since 1980!     , 
Yes. Of course, I could have made  a lot more money if I wasn't so cautious, but that is the way I 
trade. 
Do you remember your worst losing week? 
I haven't had any losing weeks during that  time, but I have had some losing days. 
That is an incredible statement.  How can you be sure that you a re not simply forgetting about 
a few weeks when you lost money trading? 
The reason I am sure is that I remember all my lo sses. For example, I have had three losing days in 
the last two years. Out of the thou sands of trades I made during that  time, I had 17 losers, but nine 
of them were because my quote machine was down, and when that happens I just get out of my  162position. 
Most traders would be happy winning on 50 p ercent of their trades, and a win ratio of 75 
percent would be spectacular, yet you are implying that your win ratio  is somewhere in the vicinity 
of 99 percent—that is re ally hard to believe.  
You can check with Leigh. I told him about hundr eds of my trades during the past few years. 
[Leigh Stevens is a mutual friend who introduced me to Weinstein.] 
OK reader, I know what you are saying: '"No losing w eeks, but I've had some losing days.' Give me 
a break." Frankly, I admit Weinstein's statements sound preposterous. I could not verify his claims 
by examining account statements because his pa rtners are vigorous in maintaining the 
confidentiality of the partnership's trading activity as it is a private trading firm, not open to the 
public. In fact, a number of his partners were adam antly opposed to this interview and were nearly 
successful in dissuading Weinstein from partic ipating. The only account statement Weinstein was 
willing, or able, to show me was his independen t entry in the option trading contest, which did 
indeed confirm that he multiplied a $ 100,000 account ninefold in three months with 100 percent 
winning trades. 
Still unsatisfied, I spoke to Le igh, who has known Weinstein for years and has spent many days 
watching him trade. I have known Leigh for three y ears and can confidently describe him as honest, 
low-keyed, and levelheaded. Leigh confirmed that  of about 100 of Weinstein's trades he had 
personally witnessed and several hundred more Wein stein told him about on the phone (right after 
he put them on), he could remember only one that wa s a loser. Even if because of faulty memory (I 
mean this literally, not as a euphemism for dis honesty), Weinstein's actual percentage winning rate 
is somewhat lower than he implies, I still be lieve his win/loss rati o is incredibly high. 
How can he do it? Weinstein's own response to this  query follows, but to put it in perspective, I 
thought some further elaboration would be helpfu l. Weinstein employs his own custom-designed 
state-of-the-art computer systems to monitor cons tantly technical indicators designed to measure 
changes in market momentum. Rather than use the standard values for thes e indicators, Weinstein 
uses his own values, which he frequently adjusts for changing market conditions. He combines this 
intensive real-time analysis with comprehensiv e chart analysis incorporating a variety of 
methodologies, including cycles, Fibonacci retracements, and Elliott Wave analysis. Finally, add to 
this one last essential ingredient: an uncanny sense of market  timing. Only when nearly everything 
lines up right and he feels the ti ming is virtually perfect does he put on a trade. He passes up many 
trades that he believes have a high probability of  working, but for which he lacks the same degree 
of near absolute confidence. Because of the combination of a lifetime devotion to studying the 
markets, intensive real-time analysis, innate mark et sense and incredibly rigorous trade selection, 
virtually all of Weinstein's trades  are at least marginally profitabl e at some point within twenty 
minutes of entry. That is all Weinstein need s to assure a breakeven or better result. 
It helps to understand that Wein stein usually plays for quick profits  and covers his trades within 
hours or even minutes. Even on position trades, Wein stein will usually take so me profits quickly to 
assure a net profitable outcome. He also trades markets in rotation, quickly shifting his profits from 
market to market, always seeking the profit poten tial with the lowest perceived risk. Finally, 
Weinstein enjoys the support of a floor network th at often puts him on the right side of the bid-
asked spread. 
Weinstein's comments may sound like boasting on the written page, but that belies their tone—
naiveté would be a much closer description. When  Weinstein talks about trades, his comments are 
peppered with phrases such as, "It's obvious the mark et is going lower," "This market is so easy." It 
is clear he has no conception of how di fficult trading is for the rest of us. 
How do you explain your ability to win such a high percentage of the time? 
Because I have a real fear of the markets. I have  found that the greatest tr aders are the ones who are 
most afraid of the markets. My fear of the markets has forced me  to hone my timing with great 
precision. When I am trading proper ly, it is like a pool player r unning racks. If my gut feel of 
market conditions is not right, I don't trade. My  timing is a combination of experience and my 
nervous system. If my nervous system tells me to get out of the position, it is because the market 
action triggers something in my knowledge and experience that I have seen before.  163I also don't lose much on my trades, because I wa it for the exact right mo ment. Most people will 
not wait for the environment to tip itself off. They will walk into the forest when it is still dark, 
while I wait until it gets light. Although the cheetah is  the fastest animal in the world and can catch 
any animal on the plains, it will wait until it is abso lutely sure it can catch its prey. It may hide in 
the bush for a week, waiting for just the right moment. It will wait for a baby antelope, and not just 
any baby antelope, but preferably on e that is also sick or lame. Only then, when there is no chance 
it can lose its prey, does it a ttack. That, to me, is the epitome of professional trading. 
When I trade at home, I often watch the sparrows in  my garden. When I feed them bread, they take 
just a little piece at a time and fl y away. They keep on flying back and forth, taking small bits of 
bread. They may have to make a hundred stabs at a piece of bread to get what a pigeon gets at one 
time, but that is why a pigeon is a pigeon. You will ne ver be able to shoot a sparrow, it is just too 
fast. That is the way I day trade. For example, there are times during the day when I am sure that 
the S&P is going up, but I don't try to  pick the bottom, and I am out before it tops. I just take the 
mid-range where the momentum is greatest. Th at, to me, is trading like a sparrow eats. 
Am I paraphrasing you correctly? The cheetah is your analogy for position trading and the 
sparrow is your analogy for day trading. The common denominator is that both animals wait 
for can't-lose circumstances. 
Exactly. 
How do you pick your trades? 
I use many different types of te chnical input: charts, Elliott Wa ve and Gann analysis, Fibonacci 
numbers, cycles, sentiment, moving averages, and various oscillators. Peopl e think that technical 
analysis is unreliable because they tend to pick  the one thing they are comfortable with. The 
problem is that no single technica l approach works all the time. You have to know when to use 
each method. 
How do you do that? 
It is experience and gut feel. I use all forms of technical analysis, but in terpret them through gut 
feel. I do not believe in mathematical systems that always approach markets in the same way. 
Using myself as the "system," I constantly cha nge the input to achieve  the same output—profit! 
Is there anything you can single out as the most  important element in deciding to put on a 
trade? 
I am always looking for a market that is losing momentum, and then go the other way. 
Having traded both the stock and commod ity markets, would you say they behave 
differently? 
Absolutely. In contrast to the commodity market s, the stock market very rarely gives you the 
opportunity to enjoy a meaningful trend. 
Why is that? 
Because when institutions and specialists sell out, they don't sell out at one price level, they scale 
out as the market goes up. Similarly, when they  buy, they scale in as the market goes down. This 
leads to choppier price action a nd is the reason why many good comm odity traders that I know lose 
every time they go into the stock market. 
But you win consistently in the stock market , as well. What are you doing differently? 
I don't try to figure out where the ma rket is going before the action; I let the market tell me where it 
is going. Also, there is such a variety of technical input in the stock market (divergence, 
advance/decline, sentiment, put/call ratios, and so  on), that you will almost  always get a signal 
before the market is about to do something. 
Is your method of technical an alysis therefore different in the stock market than in the 
commodity markets? 
I look at the indivi dual stocks; they al l have their own pers onalities. For exampl e, IBM and General 
Motors will usually rally before a major market bo ttom and fail to rally before a major market top. 
As another example, I have never seen a real good rally without the utilit ies leading the market.  164The utilities go up when interest rates are expected to come down, and when interest rates come 
down, portfolio managers jump into stocks. I have done extremely well trading the indexes, 
because before I ever traded inde x futures, I had become a very e xperienced trader of stocks and 
options. 
What do you think is the public's bigge st misconception about the markets? 
That people who trade the markets gamble. I know floor traders that have made money for twenty 
straight years. You can 't call that gambling. 
Another major misconception is that people always  expect the market to react to news. For 
example, when John F. Kennedy was assassinated, th e market initially broke very sharply, but then 
quickly rebounded to new highs. This price action ba ffled many people. Inve stors who sold on the 
news only to watch the market reverse blamed th e institutions for pushing the market higher. What 
they failed to realize is that a market that is fundamentally and technicall y poised to move higher is 
not going to reverse direction because of a news item—even a dramatic one. 
Another item I would place under the category of misconceptions is the way the media reports the 
reasons for the market being down. They are always  saying that the market is down because of 
profit taking. I think it would be wonderful if ever ybody was always taking profits. But, the truth is, 
most people lose money, and the reason markets go down is because they take their losses. I know 
educated people who watch the news and wonder w hy the hell they lost m oney when everyone else 
is taking profits. The media owes it to the public to report that the market goes down not only on 
profit taking, but on a lot of loss taking as well. 
What are the trading rules you live by? 
1. Always do your homework. 
2. Don't be arrogant. When you get arrogant, you forsak e risk control. The best  traders are the most 
humble. 
3. Understand your limitations. Everyone has limitations—even the best traders. 
4. Be your own person. Think against the herd, as they must lose in time. Don't trade until an 
opportunity presents itself. Knowing when to stay  out of the markets is as important as knowing 
when to be in them. 
5. Your strategy has to be flexib le enough to change when the environment changes. The mistake 
most people make is they keep the same strategy  all the time. They say, "Damn, the market didn't 
behave the way I thought it would. " Why should it? Life and the ma rkets just don't work that way. 
6. Don't get too complacent once you have made profits . The toughest thing in the world is holding 
on to profits. That is because once you have atta ined a goal, you then set a second goal that is 
usually the same as the first one: to make more  money. Consequently, for many people, attainment 
of that second goal is no t as rewarding. They may begin to que stion what they really want from 
trading and trigger a se lf-destruct process in which they wind up losing. 
Any final advice you have for the beginning trader? 
You have to learn how to lose; it  is more important than learni ng how to win. If you think you are 
always going to be a winner, when you lose, you will develop feelings of hostility and end up 
blaming the market instead of trying to learn why you lost. 
Limit losses quickly. To paraphrase from Reminiscences of a Stock Operator, most traders hold on 
to their losses too long because they hope the loss will not get larger. They take profits too soon, 
because they fear the profit will  diminish. Instead, traders should fear a larger loss and hope for a 
larger profit. 
Weinstein's most traumatic trading experience occurr ed when he let a material goal interfere with 
his trading. This is a common theme that has surfaced in other interviews. It invariably seems to be 
a mistake to translate the potential profit or loss of a trade into material terms. 
The cornerstone of Weinstein's trading approach is  to wait for those trades in which everything 
appears to be lined up exactly  right, and the odds  of winning seem overwhelming. Even though 
most of us can never expect to remotely approach Weinstein's conf idence in the trades he selects, 
the concept of waiting for only thos e trades one feels most confiden t about is sound advice that is 
echoed by a number of traders in this book. 
Although viewing markets as nonrandom over the long run, I have long belie ved that very short- 165term market fluctuations (i.e., intraday pri ce movements) were larg ely random. Weinstein has 
shaken this belief. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  166Part IV-The View from the Floor  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  167 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  168Brian Gelber-Broker Turned Trader 
Brian Gelber began his career as a broker, managing a major brokerage firm's financial futures 
operations on the floor of the Chicago Board of Trade. After successfully advising institutional 
clients, he began trading for his own account. In the early days of T-bond futures trading, Gelber 
enjoyed the dual distinction of being one of the most (if not the most) prominent brokers on the 
floor and one of the la rgest local traders. 
In January 1986, Gelber expanded his trading to include the direct management of customer 
accounts. In addition to his own trading, Gelber supervises a gr oup of traders in both cash and 
futures in government securities and othermarkets. He is the pres ident of a group of companies: 
Gelber Group, Gelber Management, and Gelber Securities. These companies are involved in 
clearing, brokerage, and money management. 
Gelber's relaxed personality seem ed almost out of place with hi s profession. Instead of the high 
level of intensity expected of someone who trad es and supervises trading in multimillion dollar 
bond positions daily, I found a man who talks about his work as if he were describing a pleasant 
vacation. 
Although our meeting took place during trading hours, Ge lber did not seem to be overly concerned 
with the bond market. In fact, he seemed quite relaxed, despite leaving th e trading desk for his 
private office to conduct our interview. "I'll pr obably do better by staying here," he remarked, 
obviously reflecting what he perceived to be a low-opportunity market at the time. 
In response to a query regard ing other traders I wa s interviewing, I mentioned that one, Tony 
Saliba, had made the cover of the current issue of Success magazine. Gelber asked me if I had a 
copy. I pulled out the magazine from my attache cas e and handed it to him. He smiled as he read 
the bold headline describing Saliba's experience  during the week of the October 19,1987, stock 
market crash: "Victory! He Made $4 Million in  Seventy-Two Hours." J okingly, Gelber asked, "I 
made $4 million in twenty minutes on that day; ho w come I'm not on a magazine cover?" It was not 
meant to be boastful. It did, however, very specifi cally summarize a basic tr uth about great traders: 
Many, if not most, maintain relatively low prof iles and are therefore vi rtually unknown to the 
public. 
How did you get started in this industry? 
After graduating from college in 1976,1 backpack ed around the country. In Salt Lake City, I 
answered an ad for a commodity broker position. I didn't have any idea what it was, but I figured it 
was something like a stockbroker. I got my licen se while working for a guy who was basically 
running a boiler room operation. 
You really started out on the wrong side of the business. 
When I walked in, there was a guy seated at the b ack end of a penny stock office. He spent his days 
on the phone trying to convince people to give  him $5,000 or $10,000 to speculate onhis charting 
system. It was a real fly-by-night operation. 
I was keeping his charts for him, while getting registered. I kept saying to myself, "This guy is 
pretty much of a crook." I got my license and qui t. Then I bummed around for another few months, 
just working temporary jobs to pay the rent. 
What kind of jobs? 
Unloading railroad cars. Then one day I walked into a Thomson McKin-non office and said, "Hey, 
I have a broker's license." The fellow there said  he would pay me $800 a month. That was a large 
amount of money for me at the ti me. All I had to do was go in and cold call; any accounts I opened 
would be mine. 
But you knew virtually nothing at all about markets at that time. 
I had read a couple of books, and I knew somethi ng about charts—having kept them for the first 
fellow I worked for. 
What books did you read? There weren't too many around at that time. 
The book I learned the most from was Technical Analysis of Stock Trends by Robert D. Edwards 
and John Magee (John Magee, Inc., 109 State Street, Boston, MA).  169What other books would you recommend to people? 
The first book we have our tr aders read is Edwin Lefevre' s account of Jesse Livermore, 
Reminiscences of a Stock Operator [Reprinted in 1985 from the original 1923 edition by Trader 
Press, Inc., Greenville, SC.] I've  read it at least a dozen times. 
Anyway, around the time that I started at T homson McKinnon, the Ginnie Mae market was just 
coming into its own. Thomson McKinnon had just hire d a trading group to r un a Ginnie Mae desk. 
I told them I was interested in learni ng more about the Ginnie Mae market. 
Why were you attracted to that market? 
It was a new market and seemed more manageab le than the conventional commodities. I figured 
my business would grow more steadily if I focuse d on that market. Also, I had made a number of 
trades in Ginnie Maes. The first trade was a winner, but the following ones were all losers. 
It was magnetic; I felt I could make money there, but  I kept losing, and that made me want to learn 
more about it. 
It sounds like you had a minor compulsion to pursue it. 
Yes, because I had failed. Anyway, the traders at the Ginnie Mae desk taught me a few things, and 
I went out and opened almost every mo rtgage banker account in Salt Lake. 
Did you understand the Ginnie Mae market at that time? 
When I first started opening accounts, I didn't understand anything about it. 
How then did you sell people on yourself? 
I snowballed them at first, but I listened and I le arned from the questions they asked me. Initially, I 
was confused by what they were do ing, and they were equally confus ed by what I was trying to sell 
them. 
At least you understood futures as an instrument. 
Right. And with that limited knowledge, I bumbled th rough my first few meetings. Then I really 
got pretty good at it. 
Were these hedging accounts? 
Yes, all pure hedging accounts. By May 1977,1 wa s making $2,000 a month in commissions. That 
was a tremendous amount of money for me. 
Was this all in the Ginnie Mae market? 
At that point, yes. Previously, I had done some brokerage in other commodity markets such as 
wheat, hogs, and pork bellies. 
Who were those trades for? 
Just accounts I had opened by cold calling—people w ho really didn't understa nd that they could 
lose, and when they lost, they were always upset. 
Were you giving them trading suggestions? 
Pretty much. 
Using chart analysis? 
Believe it or not, more off the research of Thomson McKinnon analysts, and secondarily off my 
charts. Newer brokers definitely tend to rely on their firm's research. 
Did your customers lose because the research was wrong? 
No. They lost because their time horizon was mos tly day to day, while the research was longer 
term. 
So there was a mismatch? 
Exactly. I think that is a basic problem between mo st brokers and their customers. It is almost 
impossible to get market information to your customer quickly enough for the customer to act on it. 
What you are saying is that ev en if a broker can actually beat  the market trading short term, 
he can't translate that to the customer. 
Insurmountable odds, because you have two people who have to pull the trigger, and the  170information changes so quickly. 
So, one of the points of advice you would give to speculators is to trade with a longer-term 
perspective? 
Yes, you have to. , , 
Let's talk about floor trading. I know, at one point, you were both a floor broker and trader 
in the T-bond futures market. The question I think a lot of people  would ask is: If you receive 
a large customer sell order at the same time you're thinking of closing out your own long 
position, how do you handle it? 
I never scalped, so the idea of being long and having a large customer order move the market 
against me 2 or 3 ticks never made any difference. Besides, I had so many cu stomers that they were 
often going opposite ways. 
OK, that's an easy one. But what if some important news was breaking, and all your 
customer orders were going one way against yo ur own position? Did you ever end up trapped 
in a position because you had to execute all the customer orders first? 
Yes, that happened to me about half a dozen times , and it probably cost me a grand total of a half 
million dollars over a number of years. But meas ured against the amount of money I was making, it 
didn't kill me. 
That was the cost of doing business? 
Right. 
It must be a gut-wrenching situation though, know ing you want to get out, but not being able 
to act because of a conflict with customer orders. 
Usually, you are too busy acting as  a broker and thinking, "OK, I ha ve to sell 1,000 lots; how can I 
do it best?" Then, when you are done with the order, you might say to  yourself, "Oh damn, I'm still 
long; I have to get out of this thing." 
Is there a built-in disadvantage for a floor trader who also handles customer orders? 
Absolutely. As I tell the people I hire, "If you are a broker, you are not a trad er; if you are a trader, 
you are not a broker." 
But you were. 
It was a wild time. I was the biggest trader and the biggest broker in the same market. I worked 
very long hours and was to tally exhausted when I went home. Then  I would just get up the next day 
and do it again. This went on for th ree years, and while it was a great  experience, I really shouldn't 
have done it. You can't be a great broker and a great trader. I did a good job, but it probably took 
years off my life. 
Are most of the significant size  traders on the floor just trad ers, or do some also handle 
customers? 
They all are either brokers or traders now. That is the only way to go; there is no doubt about it. 
Is that true of most floors , or just the T-bond floor? 
Primarily, the T-bond floor. In the S&P and in the New York markets, some of the big brokers are 
also big traders. 
Given today's increased scrutiny, are people who violate the confidence of dual trading 
[handling customer orders and trading on e's own account] likely to get caught? 
It is still very difficult to create a flaw less audit trail in an open outcry market. 
Say bonds are trading at 95.00 and the market gets hit with some bearish news. The broker 
executes a large amount of orders for customers and his own account, and the market goes 
straight from 95.00 to 94.00. His Tills are 94.31, 94.30, 94.29 and all his customers get fills at 
94.27 or lower. [Bond prices trade in 32nds.] Ho w does he explain his way out of that one? 
He could give his order or his cust omers' orders to another broker. Or he could fill both orders and 
put another broker's number on his own order. There are always ways  to get around extra scrutiny. 
The smart crooks will always be difficult to catch.  171Is the temptation in dual trading too great? 
No. After having been through it, I would say that  dual trading is good for efficiency in the 
marketplace, but it is too hea vy a burden for the individual. 
Should the rules be changed to disallow dual trading? 
That is a difficult question. What is more important, the efficiency of the mark et or the integrity of 
the individual? There is no doubt in  my mind that dual trading a dds tremendous liquidity to the 
system, and that is probably more important than the fact that a small percentage of dual traders 
may cheat. Besides, even if dual trading were ba nned, the stealers would still find a way to steal. 
That is their percepti on of how to make money in this business. 
When did you first get involved in the T-bond market? 
hi September 1977,1 moved to Chicago and b ecame a broker on the T-bond floor. I was just 
twenty-five and I got lucky. I went to New York  in November 1977 and met with eight big-name 
companies, seven of whom opened accounts. I was at the right place at the right time. 
When did you start trading for your own account on the floor? 
In 1979. 
Were you tempted to give up your floor brokerage  so that you could concentrate on trading? 
Actually, it was just the opposite . I had started out as  a customer's man, and from 1979 through 
1981,1 built a massive customer base. We were a powerful force in the market at that time. 
Probably the saddest thing I ever did was to b ecame a trader too. I was a great broker in my 
twenties, and if I had parlayed that for ten years, I probably w ould have ended up where I am now 
without enduring all the pains of trading. I cons ider trading to be an  unrewarding, unglamorous 
game. 
It's odd you say that, because you have b een far more successful than most traders. 
I guess my point is that as a broker I was at an even higher echelon. I was re ally good at it, and it 
suited my personality. 
So, why did you get into trading? 
I started trading because some of my customers said, "You know the market so well, why don't you 
just trade?" I resisted at first, but after six months of holding out, I started trading. From there it just 
evolved. 
Do you remember your first trades? 
My first trade was a long positi on, and I made some money. Then I put on a long bond/short Ginnie 
Mae spread, which was almost like being long. The market went down, and I lost all the money I 
had made, plus $50,000 more. Since I was ma king about $50,000 per month as a broker, my 
attitude was that I basically broke even that mont h. But I didn't like the feeli ng at all. So, I cut my 
position size down and started trading a little more actively. This happened during the bear market 
of 1979. The problem was that I was bullish all the way down. 
Why were you bullish? 
My customers kept telling me that rates couldn' t go much higher.* For example, I was handling the 
orders for CitiBank and Citicorp and they we re buying all the way down. These were renowned 
people saying that they had an opi nion and backing it up with deeds. 
*Bond prices fall when interest rate s rise. This is a basic concept th at is sometimes confusing to the 
novice. The reason that bond prices decline if rates incr ease can be explained as follows: If rates 
rise, itmeans that all existinglower-yieldinginstrumen ts are less attractive to investors. To induce an 
investor to purchase these lower-coupon bonds, their pr ices must fall sufficientl y so that the return 
is equivalent to the return on the higher-coupon bond purchased at face value. 
What would you do today in the same situation? 
Now, I know the characteristics of various ins titutions. Let's take Citi-Bank. Back then, I was 
buying because they were buying. Now, if Citi-Bank was buying, I might conclude that they were 
just reallocating their assets or changing the durati on of their portfolio. Toda y, I have little regard 
for the views of portfolio managers, because th eir outlook tends to cover a much longer time  172perspective than mine. I didn' t understand that back then. 
So, you don't pay much attention to those types of opinions anymore? 
I listen to them in passing. I don't read the Barren's interviews of portfolio managers anymore. It 
never did much for me, and I don't think it does much for any trader. 
In other words, the problem wasn't the fact th at you were listening to other people, but that 
you were listening to the wrong people. 
I didn't know how to decide which were the righ t or wrong people. I was a naive kid saying, "Here 
is a major account that is buying a lot of stuff; the market should go up." 
You really had no strategy, no plan, no syst em. You were just shooting from the hip. 
That's right. Then over time, I started to get a gr ip on how to make money. As opposed to saying, "I 
have an opinion and I want to express it in the market," I started askin g, "How do I make money 
out of all this?" 
What had you learned by that point? 
I had learned that an  opinion isn't worth that mu ch. It is more important to listen to the market. I 
became a reactive trader as opposed to an opinionated trader. 
In 1980, one of my customers was Solomon Brothers. At the time, they were bearish on bonds from 
65 to 80. If I had listened to my big customers as I had done in 1979,1 would have thrown away 
money all over again. 
What told you not to liste n to your customers then? 
The 1979 experience of losing money based on so meone else's opinion—a sound opinion by 
intelligent people that was just absolutely wrong. 
Where were your successes coming from? 
I learned how to read the tape and developed go od instincts. We were such big players in bonds 
back then—we, meaning my customers and myse lf—that the spots we pi cked to trade could 
virtually stop the market. We we re actually creating some of the support and resistance points. It 
didn't take that much to do it back then. I think th ere was a streak of months when I hardly had any 
losing days. 
Could you have done it without the commercial accounts? 
I would hope that I could have done it without them ; that it wasn't a self-fulfilling prophecy. But if 
it was, fine. I don't know. 
When did that streak end? 
From a trading standpoint, I ne ver had a losing y ear until 1986, although I did struggle in 1985 
during the mid-stages of the bull market in bonds. 
Was your trading success a matter of being able to read the tape? 
Yes. I was attentive and had good instincts. 
It sounds like you are saying that either you are born to be a good trader or you are not. 
Well, to a certain extent, that may be true. My fe eling is that you don't have  to be, but it helps. 
Is it a matter of having a si xth sense about the market? 
Yes. Your gut often tells you what to do. 
Are people who don't have the natural instincts for trading wasting their time? Or can almost 
anybody be successful if he or she works at it hard enough? 
Working hard has nothing to do with it. About two weeks ago, a very bright fellow who works 
forme said, "This is a very frustr ating business. It doesn't matter how hard I work; it has no bearing 
on whether I make money or not." You have to know yourself and put that knowledge to work in 
the market. 
That sounds like a cliche. What do you mean by "know yourself"? 
I'll give you an example. I think I'm a good trader, but  there is a guy working fo r me who is better. I 
could go out there and beat my head against the desk  and try to outdo him, or I can just be myself.  173Let him make whatever he can, and I'll make whatever I can. 
This is my view of a year in the life of a trader : Four out of twelve mont hs you are hot. You are so 
excited that you can't sleep at night . You can't wait to get to work the next day;  you're just rolling. 
Two months out of the year, you are cold. You are so cold, you are miserable. You can't sleep at 
night. You can't figure out where the next trade is going to come from. The other six months out of 
the year, you make and lose, make and lose. You can't sleep, because you are trying to figure out 
how you are going to make money. 
The net result is that you never sleep, because you ar e constantly thinking too much about trading. 
It is an all-consuming thing. Th at is why you need to  know yourself—to moderate your emotions. 
If you don't, then after a big succe ss, you are high as a kite. You ar e not prepared when just around 
the corner, the market suddenly brings you back to earth. Or, in the opposite situation, when you 
are consistently losing, you might end up jumpi ng out of a window. Why did I leave the floor? 
Again, because I know myself. I need to interact  with people and that doesn't happen there. 
Being on the floor sounds like a very intense th ing to be doing day in, day out. Does it 
physically grind you down? 
Absolutely. You can see that in the older fellows . When you are in your tw enties and thirties, you 
can rebound pretty well from the physical and me ntal stress. As you get older, you don't rebound as 
well, and you have to push harder  to maintain your performance. 
It sounds like professional sports. You ge t to a certain age and no matter how good you 
were— 
That's right. It's exactly like that. 
Out of every 100 people who go to the floor to become traders, how many will make at least a 
million dollars within five years? 
Maybe five or less. 
How many will end up losing everything they came in with? 
At least half. 
You have been more successful than most traders. What do you attribute your success to? 
The reason I have been so consistent is that I'm a great listener. I probably talk to about twenty-five 
traders each day. Most traders don't listen to your opinion; they only want to tell you their opinion. 
I am different because I honestly and truly listen to  what they say and how they say it. For example, 
if one of the major locals calls me up three days in a row when the market  has rallied, and he is 
asking me what I think, I know that he has been  selling and is not su re of his position. 
What does that tell you? 
If it is in line with what the othe r traders I talk to are doing, it tells  me the market will probably go 
higher. 
So if you talk to twenty-five people, and twen ty of them are nervous about the market going 
higher because implicitly they a re short, does that tell you that  you should be trading on the 
long side? 
Yes. I know a large number of peopl e in the industry and that is a big plus. I listen to them. I go 
with the people who are hot. Sure, I can form my  own opinion, but that is not what makes me do 
the things I do in the market. Sometimes, Iknow my  opinion is right, and I'll go with it. Sometimes, 
I know somebody else is hot, and I'll go with their opinion. I'm not picky about how I make my 
money. It doesn't matter if  my opinion is right or wrong. All that  matters is whether I make money. 
Doesn't it get confusing when you talk to twenty-five people and fifteen are bullish and ten 
are bearish? 
Sometimes, but I've been doing this since 1976. I've always been able to read people very well, 
even though no one thinks I listen. For example, I ha ve one trader here who is cold as ice right 
now. All I have to do is listen to him. Last night, he told me he wanted to  be short. I knew that I 
was going to be long. 
As long as he is cold?  174Right, and the one time he gets hot, fine. When the guy is cold, he is cold. You can't say to a trader, 
"You're cold, you can't trade." You have to let them run their course. 
Is reading other traders a key component of your personal trading right now? 
Yes, I'm pliable. I know these people, so I understa nd how to read them. I don't want to hear what 
Jack Schwager says, because I don't know him. I only want to talk to people I know very well. 
What other things are important to your trading success? 
The realization that when you don't care, you do we ll, and when you try too hard, you don't do well. 
By "trying too hard," do you mean pressing when there is no trade? 
Pressing is one of the reasons I'm sitting in he re with you for so long during trading hours. The 
markets haven't traded well in weeks, and we are proud of ourselves for not having thrown a lot of 
money away. 
So when the opportunities aren't there, you just lay fairly low? 
Don't misunderstand me. I'm not that good at that, but I have gotten better as I've gotten older. I've 
learned that lesson over the last couple of years.  After Richard Dennis left the floor, he said: "The 
first year I left the floor was the most painful expe rience for me, and I have pa id the largest tuition I 
ever have." It was the same with me. 
What was the motivation for coming off the floor, since you were so successful there? 
I felt that the industry had developed to the point where my brokerage skills were no longer needed. 
All anyone wanted to know was: "Where's the next tick?" "How can I move size?" The price to be 
paid for my particular skills was too low. 
You are talking in terms of customer business? 
Customer business and trading. The market had gotten so voluminous that my style of swing 
trading was worthless. It got to the point where I was just trying to read the next tick instead of the 
next 8 ticks. 
Why couldn't you play the same game? 
The volume was too big; capitalization was too bi g. I couldn't read the market from the floor. 
Because there were too many players? 
Exactly. In the early days of T-bond futures trad ing, the depth was low and you could read when 
people were overextended long or shor t. You couldn't do that anymore. 
Did your performance start de creasing; did you see the handwriting on the wall? 
In 1985,1 made under a million dollars trading for th e first time and I knew something was wrong. I 
had always been a very consistent trader, making more money each year. I looked at my results and 
found that my profits were smaller, meaning 3 a nd 4 ticks, and my losses were greater. My first 
reaction was to become a much more active pi t trader. I found that I was taking on tremendous 
positions and the risk/reward was insane. That was when I became convinced that I had to make a 
change. 
Were you just lucky that you didn't get hit really  hard during that period on any particular 
trade? 
Actually, I did get hit pretty ha rd a couple of times, but I had so me good winners too. The point is 
that as I worked harder and hard er, I found that all I wa s doing was running in place. I don't like to 
work hard at trading, and here I was just  mentally and physically exhausting myself. 
If you had been doing as well as in previous  years, would you have stayed in the pit? 
Yes. The pit is a very stimulating environment.  Off the floor, you have to  force yourself to be 
motivated each day. That was a very difficult transition. 
Is it harder to trade off the floor? 
Not in the long run. My profitability in 1987 and 1988 has been pretty good. 
You mentioned that your first year off the fl oor was very difficult. Was the main problem 
that you were still trying to trade the market as you did on the floor?  175Yes, that was the number one reason. The second reason was that the transition occurred during the 
1986 runaway bull market. I was bound to lose b ecause my style was not based on following 
trends. 
Is that still true? 
No, it has changed. I've gotten better. I can stil l countertrend trade real  well, but I found you can 
also make a lot of money trend following. 
Do you use trading systems? 
No, we are "discretionary trader s." We only use technical indicators and systems as trading tools. 
One particularly interesting system we have deve loped is based on quirks re lated to volatility. Our 
belief is that volatility offers clues to trend direction. Although we've found through backtesting 
that this system gives you good signals, we do not blindly follow the trades. 
For an automated, computerized system, what would you consider good results in terms of 
average annual return? 
About 40 to 50 percent, with maximu m equity drawdowns under 10 percent. 
But systems will always have larg er maximum drawdowns than that. 
That is why we haven't directly traded money on them. 
Do you think any system can compete with a good trader? 
I haven't seen one yet, although there may be one somewhere. 
There are some traders who have the skills, but who don't succeed. What is  it that keeps them 
from becoming successful? 
Most traders who fail have large egos and can't  admit that they are wrong. Even those who are 
willing to admit that they are wrong early in their career can't admit it later on. Also, some traders 
fail because they are too worried about losing. 
In other words, successful tradin g is a matter of trying to avoid losses, but not being afraid of 
them. 
That is a good way to put it. I'm not afraid to lose. When you start being afraid to lose, you're 
finished. 
Is the ability to accept losses a char acteristic of a winning trader? 
Yes. Tom Baldwin is a good example. He only trades the market; he doesn't trade size or equity. By 
that I mean, he doesn't say to himself, "I am long 2,000 contracts. Oh my God, that is too many, I 
have to sell some." He never looks at  it that way. He will sell eith er when he thinks  the market has 
gone up too far, or when he th inks that his position is wrong. 
In your trading experience, is  there one particular trade that stands out as the most 
dramatic? 
In 1986, when the long bond was being cornered by the Japanese, there was a big, emotional rally 
on a Monday morning. I had thought the market was t oo high at 90.00, and here it was trading over 
91.00. So I sold 1,100 contracts scale-up above that  level. The market backed down and was 
offered 1,000 lots at 91.00. Just as I was thinking that I had this trade nailed, in less than five 
minutes the market reversed and soared to 92.00. 
I was down $1 million, and the market was only a few ticks away from limit bid. I had never lost so 
much money, so fast, and it was because I di d things differently than I normally do. 
What specifically? 
I usually don't trade that big early in the year. I like to make money gradually at first and then play 
with the money I have made. 
It sounds like part of your money-management philosophy is based on treating each year 
independently. 
Right. Anyway, I sold a li ttle bit more up at the highs, and fr om that point on, I was only concerned 
with covering. I waited patiently, and the market started coming back dow n. I ended up losing only 
$400,000 for the day, not all that bad considering wh ere I was earlier. But that trade had a big  176emotional impact on me. I was flabbergasted by th e market action. I had forgotten that markets 
could run away like that. I couldn't believe how wrong I had been. 
What did you mean earlier when you said the Japanese cornered the market? 
When the Japanese want to buy something, their big thing is market share. This was the first time 
the U.S. got a good feel of how the Japa nese buy securities—they buy them all. 
Was this the move that drove us to the highs in the bond market? 
That's right. 
So, apparently, the Japanese weren't as fazed by th e yield being so low for all the risk implied 
in a long bond position. 
I don't think they look at it in terms of yield. Rather , they view things as whether prices are going 
up, and if they are, they buy. Every time they would buy, prices would go  up, and they would buy 
some more. 
The bond market has collapsed again since then; did they get out of their position in time? 
Sure. Do you know who bought the most at the highs ? The U.S. dealers who desperately needed to 
cover because they had sold on the way up. 
Are the Japanese smart traders then? 
No, they just have a style. They are cannonball tr aders. They go one way, and they all go together. 
A friend of mine at one of the Japanese shops told me about a Japanese trader who bought just 
about every long bond on the screen . About fifteen minutes later he  called back and asked, "Why is 
the basis [the price spread between cash T-bonds and T-bond future s] going out?" Naively, the 
Japanese trader had noticed that cash prices ha d gone way up, while futures didn't go up very much. 
My friend told him, "Well, you just bought every bond available. Of course, the basis is going to go 
out." They didn't really understa nd the impact of their trading. 
The Japanese did much the same thing in the U.S.  equity market in 1987 as they did in bonds in 
1986. They practically took cont rol of it, buying because prices kept going higher. 
Г11 never forgive myself for not buying stocks and selling bonds in 1987. That was going to be my 
number one trade in 1987. 
Was the reasoning that the bond market had al ready run way up, while stocks hadn't? Did 
you just believe the two market s were out of line valuewise? 
That's right. Also, we knew the Japanese were  buying the high-capitalizati on U.S. stocks. Having 
already learned their buying st yle in the bond market, the trade was even more obvious. 
Then why didn't you do it? 
The spread between the S&P and the T-bond contract was trading between $19,000 and $25,000 on 
a one-to-one contract value basis.  I went on a four-day vacation, a nd in just a few days, Japanese 
buying in the stock market had pushed the spread to $30,000. 
Why didn't you buy the spread before th e vacation, since you had the idea? 
I was waiting for the spread to break out above its trading range. I wanted to buy it above $26,000. 
At a $30,000 spread, I just c ouldn'tpull the trigger. 
What is the key trading rule you live by? 
Never add to a loser. 
What does the average trader do wrong? 
He overtrades and begs for tips. 
How do you handle a losing streak? 
I instinctively trade smaller and sometimes I just take a break. It is a good habit to wipe the slate 
clean and start fresh. 
When you are going bad, but still have some good  positions on, do you liquidate them as well? 
Absolutely. They are bound to turn against you too. 
I found the subjects of dual trad ing and the Japanese impact on the U.S. T-bond market among the 
most interesting portions of my  conversation with Brian Gelber. These subjects, ho wever, did not  177provide any insights into the art of trading. On a more practical note, one of the primary caveats 
provided by Gelber concerned the misuse of brokera ge research. He noted a tendency for the broker 
and client to use longer-term research for short- term trading. This misapplication of information 
often leads to trading losses, ev en when the research is right. 
Clearly, flexibility and suppression  of ego are key elements of Ge lber's success. Referring to hot 
traders, he notes, "I'll go with th eir opinion.... It doesn't matter if  I'm right. All that matters is 
whether I make money." 
Finally, Gelber's reaction to losing streaks is on e cited by a number of trad ers. He advises wiping 
the slate clean and starting fresh. Getting out of ev erything allows the trad er to achieve greater 
clarity. Liquidated positions, if th ey still appear attractive, can al ways be reentered once the trader 
has regained his confidence. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  178Tom Baldwin-The Fearless Pit Trader 
The trading pit of an active futures market is an imposing place. Scores of traders push over each 
other, while shouting buy and sell orders at the top of their lungs . To the uninit iated, it seems 
miraculous that this institutionalized bedlam act ually functions efficiently as a process for ex-
ecuting orders. In the frenzied world of futures pits, the T-bond ring, with over 500 traders, stands 
out as the unchallenged giant. The pit is so large that one side of  the ring often does not know what 
is happening on the other side. 
By most accounts, Tom Baldwin is th e single largest individual trad er in the T-bond pit. His trading 
size puts him in the same league as the primary in stitutional players.  Single trades as  large as 2,000 
contracts ($200 million face value T- bonds) are not unusual for him. On  a typical day, he may trade 
over 20,000 contracts (the equivalent  of $2 billion in face value T- bonds). Baldwin is in his early 
thirties, having begun trading T-bonds a scant six years ago. 
Baldwin's entry into the world of fl oor trading sounds more like a reci pe for failure th an success. In 
1982, with no prior trading experience, Baldwin le ft his job as a product manager for a meat-
packing firm to lease a seat on the Chicago Boar d of Trade. His stake was only $25,000. Out of this 
skimpy capital base, he had to pay over $2,000 per m onth to lease the seat, and at least another 
$1,000 per month for living expenses. As  if this were not enough, his wi fe was pregnant at the time. 
Obviously, Baldwin is not one to play it safe. His aggressive risk-taking posture is one of the key 
elements of his success. He turned a profit from the beginning. He was a millionaire before his first 
year was up and has never looked back. Although he d eclines to discuss the extent of his winnings, 
$30 million appears to be a conservative estimate. The true figure could be significantly higher. 
I considered an interview with Baldwin essential to this project, because of his prominence as the 
most successful floor trader in the world's larg est futures market. Baldwin, however, was not eager 
to be interviewed. Although he had done some in terviews in the past, he had obviously grown 
reluctant to do any more. Without Brian Gelber's  generous intervention—t he two are friends and 
admire each other's trading abilities—this interview would never have taken place. 
Gelber had warned me that Baldwin could be either abrasive or gracious, but to be prepared for the 
former. As an example, Gelber said that Bald win would probably answer the question of how he 
first got involved in trading with the curt respon se: "I went down to the floor and began trading." 
As it turned out, this was very cl ose to the spirit of his answer. 
I arrived at Baldwin's office several minutes afte r the end of the day's tr ading. Baldwin arrived a 
few minutes later. Since he had just moved to new offices and the furniture had not yet been 
delivered, the interview was conducted sitting on a window sill. 
Baldwin's attitude was neither abrasive nor gracious; aloof might be the best way to describe it. I 
had the distinct impression that the minute I hes itated in asking the next question, Baldwin would 
be gone. It was St. Patrick's Day, and this impre ssion was intensified each time someone left the 
office saying that he or she woul d meet Baldwin at a local bar. I could sense that Tom was anxious 
to join them. I decided to conduct the interview completely impromptu, s hooting off a new question 
the second he finished answering the prior one. Often his responses were quite short. I felt like a 
photographer stalking a rare bird; one fals e step and the bird would fly off. 
I knew that, at some point, I would not be able to think of an immediate follow-up question. This 
happened about forty minutes into the intervie w. I quickly glanced down at my index cards, 
searching for a lead. Unfortunate ly, my eyes focused on a questio n I had already touched upon, and 
though I tried to ask it from a different perspectiv e, it was too late. The game was over. Baldwin 
said he had to get going and excused himself. 
How did you first get interested in trading? 
I had taken some classes in commodities in graduate  school. I wanted to trad e, but I didn't have the 
money to buy a seat. In 1982, 1 found out I coul d lease a seat, and that's when I began. 
Did you always want to trade as a local as opposed to any other type of trading? 
Yes. 
How did you learn to trade? 
One lot at a time. I always had an opinion. All day long I stood there and deve loped an opinion. As  179I came to see that my opinion was right, I was rein forced, even if I didn't make the trade. Then 
when I traded, I knew from standing there six hours a day, every day, that most of the time I was 
right. I would see the same scenar ios develop over and over again. 
Are you talking about market pattern s or traders doing certain things? 
Both. Market patterns would occu r over and over again, or market  players would do the same thing 
over and over again, and you just trade it. 
What were your first few months like?  Were you profitable initial- 
I think the most I was ever down was 19 ticks,  so I pretty much started out profitably. 
Coming to the pits with no background, what wa s it that gave you enough of an edge to be 
right on the market? 
I worked hard. I stood there six hou rs a day, all day, every day.  
But you didn't have any experience to fall back on. 
You don't need it. You don't need any education at all to do it. The smarter you are, the dumber you 
are. The more you know, the worse it is for you. 
For your type of trading—that is, scalping—whe n you put on a trade, what are you looking 
for? 
To get as much as I can get out of it. I've taken full points or just 1 tick out of a trade. You just 
never know. You have to watch the market, get a feel  for it, and if you are in the right position, just 
go with it. 
On average, though, your trades will net out at a few ticks? 
Yes. I probably average 4-ti ck profits on big positions. 
I assume your holding time is probably very, very short.  
I try to make it short.  
Are we talking about minutes? 
Yes, or seconds. Just because that is less risk. The object is always: Minimize your risk. 
Have you always been a scalp-type trader? 
Well, I evolved from a pure scalper to a combination of scalper and speculator. 
Right now, what percentage of your trades are position versus scalp? 
A small percentage, well below 10 percent. 
Basically then, you are still using the same  basic trading style yon started out with. 
Right. 
Do you use any technical input? 
Yes. I use charts. 
Do you use intraday charts, since you are trading short term? 
No. Bar charts covering the past six months. 
If y o u  lo o k  a t th e ch a rts a n d  sa y ,  " I'm b a si cally bullish," do you primarily scalp from the 
long side? 
Not necessarily. I would start with an opinion, but if I saw something to change my mind, I would 
adjust. 
Is the fact that you started off with a chart-influenced tradin g bias a key element behind your 
winning? 
Yes. 
Were there periods when you were unsucce ssful, or did you remain consistent? 
Consistent. 
Didn't you have any losing months? 
Yes, I had one or two.  180But not two together? 
No, never. 
What percentage of those who come to trade on  the floor are still around after five years, 
versus losing their stake and dropping out? 
Less than 20 percent. That is really the ra le of thumb, and it's probably less than that. 
What percentage are successful to the point of  making and keeping at Least a couple of 
million? 
One percent. 
In other words, a very sm all fraction of traders. 
Right. It is like any other indus try. How many people get to be president of General Motors? 
Do you have an opinion about what separa tes the 1 percent from  the other 99 percent? 
Yes. It is a lot of hard work, fo r one. It's perseverance. You have to love to do it. Also, in our 
business, you have to have a total disr egard for money. You can't trade for money. 
Do you mean as long as you like the position, you stay with it? That you can't think, "I'm 
losing $1 million on this trade,  and with $1 million I could h ave bought a great house." You 
can't translate it into real terms. 
Exactly. Most people do. 
I guess another way of saying it is you have to have almost no fear. 
Right. 
Is that a characteristic of winning traders : They have less fear than the losers? 
Yes. 
Can you size up a new trader on the floor and te ll if he is going to make it or not? 
Yes. 
What kind of things would tip you off that he is a loser? 
Most important, losers don't work hard enough. Mo st people walk in and think there is a 50/50 
chance on any trade. They don' t think there is anything more to it than that. They don't concentrate. 
They don't watch the factors that affect the market. Y ou can see it in their eyes ; it is almost as if 
there is a wall in fr ont of their face. 
By factors, do you mean fundamentals? 
No. Paying attention to what other markets are doing, such as the Dow Jones or gold. Watching the 
traders in the pit. 
Patterns? 
Yes. 
In other words, they are not paying enough atte ntion. They are standing there trying to pick 
a trade here and there, but they are not absorbing everything that is going on. 
Right. Also, their expenses are usually way too high. They can't stand there and hack it long 
enough to pick it up. Because it is like any job, if you stand there long enough, you have to pick it 
up. It is just a matter of how long you can  afford to stand there before you do. 
Do you really believe that? 
Well, the average guy might not be a million-dollar trad er, but if he stands there for five years, he 
would have to pick it up. It is just like a job. Yo u don't start any job and feel comfortable in the first 
six months. 
You did. 
Yes, but I did start as a one -lot trader. And I wasn't r eally comfortable, because I had to make 
money. I only had $25,000 to my name. 
At what point were you confident that you were going to be successful at it? 
That is an interesting question. You are never r eally confident in this business, because you can  181always be wiped out pretty quickly. The way I tr ade is: Live by the sword, die by the sword. There 
is always the potential that I could get caught with  a big position in a fluke move with the market 
going the limit against me. On the other hand, there is  no doubt in my mind that I could walk into 
any market in the world and make money. 
What percentage of your days are losers? 
One day out often. 
Has that percentage changed over time? 
That is over a long period of time. 
From your perspective, what does the aver age trader—that is, public trader—do wrong? 
They trade too much. They don't pick their spot s selectively enough. When they see the market 
moving, they want to be in on th e action. So, they end up forci ng the trade rather than waiting 
patiently. Patience is an important trait many people don't have. 
Waiting for the right spot? 
Right, I bet most peopl e are probably ahead after th eir first five trades. They  think, "This is great, 
like free money." But then they forget that the reason they made money on their early trades was 
because they waited a long time. They  said, "I bet this is a good spot to buy it because I've seen the 
market act this way a lot of times." And they made money. But all of a sudden, they are doing a 
trade every day. 
The next thing that happens is they lose on a fe w trades, and invariably don't know how to take a 
loss. They made money to start, and before they know it, they are even. No w they hesitate. "Where 
do I get out?" The minute they hesitate, the mark et just keeps going. Now they are losing money 
and they say, "If I sell it here, I'm going to  lose $1,000." They don't like to lose $1,000, when 
they're getting paid $500 a week. Now, all of  a sudden, they are thinking about the money. 
Once you think about th e money, you are dead? 
Yes. That is what usuall y happens to the public.  
What is your own way of hand ling losses? Get out. Quickly? 
If I can. My point is that I have a lot of patien ce and I wait. If I know it is a losing trade, I wait for 
what I think is the optimum time to bail out. Then I try and reverse. 
So, if you realize you don't like  the trade anymore, you'll get ou t, but you'll pick your time? 
Right, but I will get out. 
Let's say you are doing that on a day when the market is a one-way stree t. At what point do 
you just have to cough it up? 
It depends how far it has gone against you. If it's against you a long way, at some point you just 
throw it in. Those days happen maybe three or f our times a year. You just start bailing out. 
But you usually have a feel for when that is the thing to do? 
Yes, because it has happened before. 
But normally, if you are just a bit behind in a trade, you are better off if you let the market 
move a little in your direction and try to sell on strength, or buy  on weakness, instead of just 
trying to dump it in a hurry? 
Right. 
Is that a key element to your trading style? 
Yes. Never give up on a trade. Many traders who are in a losing trade will ju st get out because they 
were taught that you have to have discipline. Great. Those traders will always be around. But if 
they just had some patience and said, "Yes, it is go ing to be a losing trade, but instead of getting out 
here at 7, maybe if I wait and just sweat it  out for another minute, I can sell at 10." 
Is it a matter of just wanting to get out to stop  the pain? And if they were willing to stand the 
pain a little longer, they wo uld be better off. Is that a fair way of putting it? 
Yes. They give up too quickly. In most cases, if you don't give up, you might be able to turn a five-
yard loss into a two-yard loss.  182Your trading size has obviously grown quite dramatically since you  first got into the business. 
Has that made it harder to trade? 
Yes, you have to adapt. You need to change you r method of buying and selling, because the market 
is continually changing in subtle ways. 
What changes have you seen in the bond market since you got in? 
Well, you can trade bigger size. Now you can usually trade a couple of hundred at e ach tick. It 
doesn't move the market as much. 
How about a thousand lots? 
It depends on the liquidity at the time. Lots of  times you can get out. It is amazing how much 
liquidity there is when you want to get out. 
On average, if you had to dump a thousand,  how much would that move the market? 
Depending on the time of day and th e liquidity, maybe 1 or 2 ticks. 
Not much at all? 
No, not much. 
Has size been an impediment at all if the liquidity is that good? 
Yes, it is harder. Generally, when you get into a big position, the rest of the floor knows about it 
because they stood there and watched you. At least they think they know. They all put their hands 
down and wait when they think you are wrong. It is  natural for a trader to be skeptical. 
I would almost think that because you have a long-term record of success, they would more 
often coattail you. 
Lots of times that is true, and that also make s it harder to get in and out. When you go to offer 
them, they are all offering too. 
How do you handle those situations? 
You have to pick your spot. You have to wait for th e big paper order to come in and then go for it. 
Does it become like a chess game, where you so metimes want the pit th inking that you are 
selling when you are really buying? 
Yes, sometimes. But generally, you can't trade big size when you are doing that. 
So, frequently, if you are long and want to liquidate, you just wait for the bid to come in? 
Right. 
What kinds of things do you look for in a chart? 
Key points such as the high and low for the week , the halfway backpoint, and consolidation areas. 
Do you use charts for short-term or long-term perspective? 
Short term. 
Short term in your case meaning? 
I guess as short as possible. You get in a trade, make money as fast as possible, and minimize your 
risk. 
I've noticed that a lot of times, bonds will take  out one- and two-week highs or lows by a few 
ticks and then pull back. The price action almost  seems like a trap for the breakout players. 
Is that a pattern in the bond market? 
Yes. It always has been. 
Do you use fundamentals? 
Whenever any important fundamental numbers come out, I use them. 
Do you use the fundamentals indir ectly, that is, by seeing how th e market responds to the new 
information? 
Yes, but also by being the first one to trade off the new fundamental information. I know what I am 
going to do if a number comes out one way or the ot her, and I usually  have the opportunity to be 
first.  183You want to get there before the crowd does. Are you normally right on that type of trade? 
Yes. 
You've done tens of thousands of trades. Does  any single trade stand out as particularly 
emotional? 
The first 100-lot I did. It was a milestone.  
What kind of jump was that for you? 
You tend to go from one lot to five lots to  ten lots to twenty lots to fifty lots. 
So, you probably went from 50 to 100? Do you remember that trade? 
Yes, it was a much bigger risk. The market was trading at 64.25 and a broker bid 25 for 100 lots. 
But he didn't put a size on it, he just bid 25. So I said, "Sold." He thought I was being funny and 
said, "I'll buy the 100," knowing I had never traded that big before. So I said, "Well, I'll sell you 
100." The market went to 24 offered instantly. 
It almost sounds like you did your first 100-lot as a dare? 
Well, almost. But I wasn't a very  good trader then. I immediatel y bought ten, then ten more. I was 
trying to bid at 23, and the market  went to 22 offered. By the time  I got out, I had ten different 
people in the trade, because I didn't know how to cover 100 lots. 
But the trade worked out for you? 
Oh yes. Well, actually, the word got out that this sma ll trader had done a 100-lo t. So I had to go up 
to the office to talk to the clearing firm after the close. 
How long had you been trading at that time? 
Six months. 
That was pretty early on. I assume your capi talization was really inadequate to handle 100 
lots? 
Right. I had probably made $100,000 by then. Maybe not even that.  
Even at $100,000, that wouldn't cov er you for much of a move. 
Yes, only 1 point. [In bonds, 1 point equals 32 ticks (the sm allest price movement).] I told them, 
"Look, I just thought it was a great trade at the time, and I'll proba bly never do it again." 
How long was it before you  traded 100 lots again? 
Two days. 
You just never thought abou t the risk side of it? 
No, if a guy bids 25 for 100, and I think that it is a great trade, I just say "Sold." 
Is there any element in your mindset as a trader that says: I had better be careful that I'm 
always in the game? 
That came later. 
Are you always in control, or are th ere days when you have lost control? 
There were days when I've lost control.  
Any that stand out? 
A couple. You have to say that about any day you lose a couple of million dollars. 
Were those days one-way street markets? 
Yes, one-way streets. Because I'm a market maker,  I take the other side of the trend. So, if the 
market goes one way for 50 ticks, I can guarantee  you I'm going the wrong way, and at some point, 
it is going to be a loss. 
What was your position at the October 1987 low in bonds? 
I was long. 
When did you start getting long? 
Five points higher.  184Five full points! You mean 81? 
Yes. The day it broke below 77,1 was long thousands of  contracts. Other traders were also heavily 
long. 
That was the day we gapped sh arply lower. Who was selling? 
The commercials just kept selling.  
Did you have second thoughts? 
Yes. 
Did you think if the market went down to 76, maybe it could go to 70? 
No. At that point, you had to  say it was all over and done. 
Why? 
Technical analysis and experience. 
Was that an example of your bein g patient in picking your spot  to get out, even when the 
initial trade was wrong? 
Right. 
Do you ever use any trading systems for anything? 
No. They wouldn't be there if they weren't wrong.  
Do you think trading system s are a losing game? Sure. Why do they exist?  
You tell me. Because people aren't confident in their own ability. If you had a really good trading 
system, you could make millions. Why would you sell it for $29.95? 
Does luck have anything to do with trading? 
Trading is like any other job. You work hard, put in the time and effort, and make your own luck. I 
was lucky that the first 100-lot I sold was a winn er. But why was I lucky? Because I stood there all 
day for over six months, developing and honing ma rket feeling. When the opportunity occurred, I 
didn't hesitate. 
You have to pay your dues to get the luck. 
Right. 
Are there people on the floor who are not good traders, but are way ahead because they just 
happened to do a couple of big trades on the right side of the market? Can anybody really get 
by just on luck? 
No, not for long. The rule of thumb is if you have lasted a year, you will make it, but it is hard. 
Are there traders that you are influenced by  because you respect what they are doing? 
Oh, yes. They are indicators. 
So, that is actually part of your trading appr oach. For example, if trader X is a good trader, 
and he is on a roll, and you are thinking of se lling— And he does, then you know you're right. 
But if he is buying? 
Then you hesitate. Maybe you don't get into the trade. 
Are there traders who can't succeed because thei r ego is too big to ever be influenced? 
Yes. 
Is part of the success a willingness to not always do your own thing? 
Right. You have to adapt to your success. If you ma ke a lot of money, all of a sudden you start to 
think you are infallible. You forget the reason you we re right was because of all those little factors 
that you followed. As soon as you think, "I'm the guy who is going to lead the way," you get 
slammed. 
So, it really doesn't make a difference whether it  is your idea or somebody else's. Winning or 
losing is all that counts. Where the idea came from isn't important? 
Right. 
Do you have to be somewhat of an egomaniac to be a good trader?  185Actually, the best traders have no ego. To be a gr eat trader, you have to have a big enough ego only 
in the sense that you have confid ence in yourself. You cannot let e go get in the way of a trade that 
is a loser; you have to swallow your pride and get out. 
After you get way ahead, is there a temptation to say, the extra money doesn't mean anything 
anymore, maybe I should cash in the chips? 
I never thought that way. Obviously, when I starte d, I needed to make money to support my family, 
but I never had a goal to make a million dollars. I said, "Hey, this is great, maybe I can make 
$100,000." 
You passed that a very long time ago. Do you have any other goals? 
No. 
You just do what you do because you enjoy it? 
Yes. And I hope it lasts. 
 
Baldwin's incredible trading achievements made him an ideal interview candidate for this book. 
However, I did not really expect his comments to  be pertinent to myself or other off-the-floor 
traders. After all, what could a floor trader , whose time horizon is measured in minutes and 
seconds, say that was relevant to trader s who hold positions for weeks or months? 
To my surprise, the interview yielded some rele vant insights. Perhaps the most important point 
made by Baldwin was his emphasis on not viewing tr ading in terms of mone y. To him, money is 
only a means of keeping score. By contrast, most tr aders tend to think of gains and losses in terms 
of their monetary implications—a frame of mi nd that only gets in the way of making trading 
decisions. 
For example, assume you originally planned to  risk up to $5,000 on a trad e, and quickly find 
yourself down by $2,000. If, at this point, you start to  think of the trade in  terms of money (for 
example, "the extra $3,000 can pay for my vacati on"), you might well liquidate the position, even 
though you still believed in the trad e. It is one thing to get out  because you no longer like the 
position, but it is quite another matter to liquidat e on impulse simply because you have translated 
the risk into tangible terms. 
Another interesting point made by Baldwin is an unconventional one: Don' t get out of a losing 
trade too hastily; instead, wait and choose your time. This advice seem s to fly in the face of most 
trading advice. After all, isn't one  of the basic tenets of tradin g success to cut your losses quickly? 
However, I don't think Baldwin's statement contradicts the rule. I believe he is  saying that often the 
worst time to bail out of a position is during a vi olent price move agains t you. Baldwin's point is 
that by bearing the pain just a little longer, you ma y be able to find a more favorable circumstance 
for liquidating. Of course, this philosophy should be applied only by discipline d traders: those with 
the ability to maintain a risk control strategy. 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  186Tony Saliba-"One-Lot" Triumphs* 
Tony Saliba came to the floor of the Chicago Boar d Options Exchange in 1978. After a half-year of 
clerking, Saliba was ready to tr y it on his own. He found anothe r trader to back him for $50,000, 
and after a favorable start, nearly self-destructe d. He pulled back from the brink of disaster by 
altering his trading techniques, and has been successful ever since. 
Saliba's trading style can be descri bed as trying to do a little better  than treading water day in, day 
out, while being positioned to ta ke advantage of the rare spect acular trading opportunity. His 
fortune has been built largely by exploiting only a handful of such events. Two of these 
situations—the Teledyne price explosion a nd the October 1987 stock market collapse—are 
discussed in the interview. 
The impressive aspect of Saliba's trading achieve ments is not the few spectacular gains he has 
registered in his career. Rather, it is that thes e gains have been achieved by using a trading 
approach exemplified by incredible risk control.  In fact, at one point, Saliba managed to string 
together seventy consecutive months of pr ofits exceeding $100,000. Quite a few traders have 
become multimillionaires by scoring several big h its. A much smaller number have managed to 
hold on to their gains. Only the rare trader can boast both occasional dramatic gains and consistent 
trading profits. 
*Readers unfamiliar with options may wish to first read Appendix 2 in order to understand the 
trading-related reierences in this chapter. 
Although the homework required for Saliba's successf ul trading is extensive, he has nonetheless 
managed to diversify into a wide range of other ventures, including real estate investments, a 
software company, and a restaurant chain. Overal l, his extracurricular business endeavors have 
proven only modestly profitabl e, but they have indulged his appetite for variety. 
During the time these interviews were being conducted, Saliba was involved in the most important 
business venture of his life: negotiating with a French bank to back him with several hundred 
million dollars to form a major trading company. Hi s goal is to discover a nd train a generation of 
successful traders. 
Saliba is a likable person who make s you feel like you're one of his be st friends within five minutes 
of meeting. He is a person who ge nuinely likes people—and it shows. 
On the evening before our scheduled meeting, Sa liba had a minor accident, slipping on the marble 
floor at the health club in the Chicago Board Options Exchange building. As I showed up at the 
scheduled time, his aide told me that Tony would not be in that morning due to the accident. I left a 
message. Saliba called later that day, and to spar e me the inconvenience of missing my flight that 
evening, or making another trip to Chicago, he  arranged to meet me several hours later. 
We talked at the LaSalle Club bar, which was su fficiently empty to not ca use a major distraction. 
Initially, I was too intensely focu sed on directing the interview to pay any attention at all to the 
largemovie screen at the front of th e bar. Later on, however, as I rela xed, I glanced at the screen as 
Saliba was answering one of my questions. I inst antly recognized the train scene from the movie 
Risky Business in which the sensuous Rebecca DeMornay seduces Tom Cruise. 
I have a bad habit of severely  overscheduling my appointments,  and as Saliba was my third 
interview of the day, I was beginni ng to feel the strain. My first thought was, "Keep your eyes off 
the screen, you are having a hard enough time keepi ng your mind focused as it is." My second 
thought was, "It would be incredib ly rude not to pay full attenti on to Tony, especially after he 
literally hobbled over to spare me the inconveni ence of having to resche dule our interview." My 
third thought was, "Thank God I' m the one facing the screen." 
What led you to become a trader? 
I was a caddy for some grain traders when I was in  high school. In college, a friend of mine asked 
me if I would like to be a broker. I thought that he meant doing the same thing as the guys I had 
caddied for. So, I said, "Yes. Great! Where?" "Ind ianapolis," he answered. I said, "What exchange 
is in Indianapolis?" "None," he said, "you do it on the phone." I had this impression of: "Hello New 
York, buy; Chicago, sell." When I got there, I found out I was a salesman. 
After a few months, I asked the guys in the offi ce, "Who makes all the money in this business?" 
They said you have to be on th e floor. Right there I decided to go to the Chicago Board Options  187Exchange. On the floor, I met one of the traders I had caddied for years ago, and he grubstaked me 
with $50,000. 
Isn't that unusual, giving $50,000 to a kid who used to caddy for you? 
It was, except that he was very wealthy and need ed to get off the floor because of his high blood 
pressure. He owned a seat that he had bought for only $10,000, and just  needed the ab ility to trade 
in a customer account. I was going to help him do that. 
What made him think you could make it as a trader? 
He had heard some rumors around the floor that  I was a hotshot clerk, and he basically took a 
chance on me. 
What happened? 
I went from $50,000 to about $75,000 in the fi rst two weeks. I had put on all these volatility 
spreads [an option position that will gain if the market becomes more  volatile] and they were 
getting pumped up. 
Did you think, "Boy, this is easy"? 
I thought, "This is it!" I mean, I was a genius. But what I was re ally doing was taking the opposite 
side of positions the other brokers were liquidating, letting them out of the market with their profits, 
while I was left holding the bag. This was spri ng 1979 and implied volatiliti es were very high 
because 1978 was a very volatile year. Well, th e market went nowhere, and the volatility and 
option premiums collapsed. Within six weeks I had lost almost everything. The original $50,000 
was down to only about $15,000.1 was feeling suicid al. Do you remember th e big DC10 crash at 
O'Hare in May 1979, when all those peopl e died? That was when I hit bottom. 
Was that a metaphor for your mood? 
Yes. I would have exchanged places with one of t hose people in that plane on that day. I felt that 
bad. I thought, "This is it; I've mined my life." 
Did you feel guilty because you had lost someone else's money? 
Yes, and I felt like a failure.  
Had you started out confident? 
Initially, I was very confident because before I started tradi ng on my own, I had clerked for a 
broker for four months and picked his brain clean. 
And now you thought the game was over? 
Yes. In June 1979,1 decided that I better find another job. I went to the Levy brothers, who owned 
a chain of restaurants that my dad built for them . They said, "Any time you want a job, you can run 
one of our restaurants." So, I said, "Hold that  line. I am going to give it one more month," 
Did you feel better because you had a cushion? 
Yes. I said, "This is great, I've sti ll got fifteen grand in my account."  
You had a stop on your life so to speak? 
Exactly, exactly. I had a stop on my career. So, I decided to go back  and give it one more shot. 
Did the fellow who staked you know how much you had lost ? Did he ever say anything? 
Oh, good question, Jack. He called me every night . I' ve grubstaked ma ny guys since then, and 
three or four of them have lost more than fifty grand each. This man was a multimillionaire, and he 
acted as if this was the end of the world. 
Did he ever ask you for the rest of the money back? 
No, he just moaned and groaned. He had become  wealthy through inheritance and money he made 
in another business. He really didn't know much about option trading. He had bought the seat to 
have something to do with his life. He told me , "If you lose $5,000 more, we 'll pull the plug." So, I 
spent the next few weeks winding down my positions. 
During that time, I sought advice from the more  experienced brokers on the floor. They said, "You 
have to be disciplined and you have to do your  homework. If you do those two things, you can 
make money down here. You might not get rich, but you can make $300 a day, and at the end of  188the year that's $75,000. You have to  look at it that way." It was lik e a light bulb went on. I realized 
that this chipping away approach was what I s hould be doing, not putting myself at a big risk, 
trying to collect a ton of dough. 
At the time I was in Teledyne options, which was a very volatile market. So, I switched to Boeing, 
which was a very tight, narrow range type of mark et. I became a spread scalper trying to make a 
quarter or an eighth of  a point on a trade. 
I stuck strictly to my goal of tr ying to average $300 a day and it  was working. This period taught 
me to be regimented and disciplined. 
То this day, I live by the credo of hard work, ho mework, and discipline. I teach my guys that. 
Anyway, at this same time, I stil l had the remnants of a big spread  position in Teledyne that I was 
in the process of liquidating. It wa s a position that would lose in a rising market. One day after I 
had been trading Boeing for about five weeks, Teledyne started moving up sharply. I was not going 
to let it get me again. I rushed into the Teledyne pit to take my position off. I was hearing floor 
brokers come in with orders, and all of a sudde n I found myself responding to them. I was adapting 
the same technique I had learned in Boeing to Teledyne, except inst ead of scalping for an eighth or 
a quarter, I was scalping for halves and dollars. 
What size were you trading at the time? 
I was doing one lot at a time. The guys didn't like me because I was getting in their way. They 
wanted to do ten- or  twenty-lot orders. 
In other words, you were just a nuisance. 
Exactly. 
How did you get someone to take one lot? 
On the options floor, it's first come, first served. If you have 100 to sell and someone bids first for 
just one, you have to do his one before you do 99 with the number two guy. The broker could 
ignore you if he wants, but if he  does, he's breaking the rules. 
Were you ignored? 
The brokers never did, but the market makers on the floor did.  
By brokers, you mean order fillers? 
Yes. The floor brokers are the order fillers, and the market makers are the locals who trade for 
themselves. On the options ex change, the two are separate. 
Were you the only one-lot trader in Teledyne? 
For the most part, yes. 
Did you take a lot of ribbing? 
Oh, did I! They called me "one-lot" for the long est time. The individual w ho gave me the hardest 
time was the best trader in the crowd. He had ma de millions and was virtually a legend in his own 
time. He started leaning on me and ribbing me  right from the beginning. He made my life 
miserable. 
Did your ego get dented by these really successful traders railing you? 
Oh, yes. And, it went on for al most a year, day in, day out.  
W`re you tempted to pick up your trading a little bit? 
I did, but not for that reason. My backer, who had given me such a hard time when I was down, 
was the prod. Although he didn't know that much a bout trading, he did give me one piece of very 
useful advice. Once I started turn ing it around, he told me to increa se my size. He said, "Tony, a 
banker makes his first loan and he is very careful,  but as he gets more co mfortable, he makes his 
loans bigger. You need to  increase your size." 
How did the harassment you were taking on the floor finally end? 
When they introduced puts in June 1980, the lead trader, who had given me the hardest time, hated 
them. He said they were bad for the business and he didn't want to trade them. I seized that 
opportunity to really study what put s would mean to us, and I was one of the first market makers to 
start trading puts.  189Actually, it opens up a whole range of new strategies. 
Oh, unbelievable. These other guys were set in th eir ways, even though they had only been there a 
couple of years. Sooner than you might think, this  nmnber one trader befriended me and suggested 
that we work together. We started working on advanced strategies, ge tting real creative and 
abstract. 
Were you working these out on a computer? 
No, we did everything by hand. Wr iting out all these "what-ifs." 
Didn't you still have to be guessing right  on price and volat ility direction? 
You would have to guess right on volatility. However, we didn't have to peg market direction, 
because we were setting up spread s that had a big edge. For example, one option might be highly 
overvalued because it was popular  among the member firms. 
Eventually, I felt I was doing more of the work, while  this top trader in th e pit was counting on his 
ability to muscle the market. He would also stray from the strategies we had worked out and even 
started doing things to try to hurt me. I would say, "What ar e you doing?" He would just answer, "I 
changed my mind." 
Finally, I just said, "Forget it, I'm working on my own." I started taking on more size. When 
interest rates went through the roof in 1981 and early 1982, my strate gies worked really well and I 
started making a lot of money. Then in the bu ll market in 1982,1 had days when I was making 
$200,000 a day. The guys in my clearinghouse couldn't be lieve the sheets; there was just tons of 
paper. 
What kind of trades were you doing? 
I was doing everything. I consider  myself a matrix trader. I trad e everything on the screen as it 
interrelates to everything else. My  basic strategy, however, was buying butterflies [a long or short 
position at one strike price balanced by an opposite position in higher and lower strike options—for 
example, long one IBM 135 call, short two IBM 140 calls, and long one IBM 145 call] and 
offsetting that with an explosion position. 
By buying butterflies, do you me an you were long the middle or  long the wings [that is, the 
higher and lower strike price options]? 
Long the wings. Your risk is limited, and if the market does not move widely, time decay works in 
your favor. [Barring a favorable price move or an increase in volatility, the value of an option 
erodes steadily over time. In a relatively flat mark et, the premium erosion in options with a strike 
price near the market price—"middle" in butterfl y spread—will be greater than that of options 
further removed from the strike price— "wings" in spread.] Of course, I tried to buy the butterflies 
as cheap as I could. If I chaine d enough of them together, my prof it zone would be fairly wide. 
Then I would do an explosion position in a more distant month. 
What do you mean by the term "explosion position"? 
That's basically my own term. An explosion positi on is an option position th at has limited risk and 
open-ended potential, which will profit from a large price move or an increase in volatility. For 
example, a position consisting of long out-of-t he-money calls and long out-of-the-money puts 
would be an explosion position. 
It sounds like the basic unifying fe ature of the explosion position is that as the market moves, 
the delta [the expected price change in the option position given a one-unit change in the price 
of the underlying market] increases in your f avor. So, you are really betting on volatility. 
Exactly. 
In effect, this is the opposite of what you do with the butterfly. 
Yes. I put on the butterfly in the front month, where time is working for me, and the explosion 
position in the mid- or back-month. Then I compleme nt that with scalping to help pay for the time 
decay in the explosion position. 
In other words, the explosion posi tion is your money bet in case of a big move, while your 
scalping is paying the bills, that is, the time decay cost of the explosion position.  
Exactly.  190Were you always offsetting one position with another? In other words, were you always delta 
neutrafl [An option position in which total equi ty will remain roughly unchanged for small 
price changes in either direction.] 
Usually, but once in a while I woul d take a significant net position.  
What was your first really big trade? 
Teledyne in 1984. The stock had dropped sharply a nd I was building up a position in the out-of-the-
money October calls. Well, the stock started inchi ng back up, but these guys  from the Pacific Coast 
Exchange, where they also list Te ledyne, were leaning on my longs. Th ey just kept battering them 
on the close every night. Instead of shying away, I stepped up and would buy them. "You want to 
sell them at ГА, I'm 1'л bid for fifty." This went on for over ten trading days. 
Why were these Pacific Coast traders leaning on the calls? 
The stock had gone down from 160 to 138, and th en inched its way back up to 150.1 guess they 
didn't think it was going to go up anymore. On Ma y 9 at 9:20 they stopped trading in Teledyne 
because of news pending. The news comes across the tape: "Teledyne Announces a Stock 
Repurchase Program at $200 per Share." 
Buying back their own stock? 
Yes. The stock was at $155, and I owned the $180 calls. Overnight, I made millions. The stock 
eventually went up to $300. The next four to five months were great. 
What happened after that? 
One of my goals in life was to become a millionaire before I was thirty and retire. Well, I was a 
millionaire before I was twenty-five. I had decide d to retire when I was thirty. On May 5, 1985, my 
thirtieth birthday, I walked off the floor and said good-bye to ev erybody and that was it. I was 
never going to come back to the floor. 
How far were you up then? 
About $8-9 million. 
Did you know what you were going to do? 
I didn't really know. I thought I'd stay in th e business somehow, but work off the floor. 
How long did your retirement last? 
About four months.  
Were you bored? 
Yes. I missed the markets. I missed the excitement. 
So, in the beginning, money was the goal, but once you got there it became. 
Yes, it became secondary. Maybe if  I had a wife and kids, or someone special in my life, I might 
not have gone back. But trading wa s my life. It made me feel like something; it gave me a reason 
for being. 
I understand one of your best trading periods wa s the week of the Octo ber 1987 stock crash. 
Tell me about it. 
I was expecting a big move, but I didn't know if it would be up or down. So, I started building the 
same type position that I had in Teledyne. 
The butterfly spread combined with the explosion position. 
Yes. 
What was the explosion position in this case? 
In this case, it was formed by buying out-of-the-m oney puts and out-of-the-m oney calls in the back 
months. To counterbalance this position, I had butte rfly spreads in the front month, which would 
profit from time decay. 
What told you the market was going to have a big move? 
You could feel it in the w ild gyrations that were occu rring by late September. 
Did you expect the move to be on the downside by that time?  191Actually, I thought it was going to be on the upside. At  first, I thought we were going to attack the 
old highs again. 
When did you change your mind? 
On Wednesday of the week before the crash, th e market fell apart. Thursday, it didn't bounce back, 
but kind of churned. Now, if it had rallied on Frida y, then I would have been confused. But instead, 
the market cracked on Friday. At that point, I was sure we were going down. 
Because it was the end of the week? 
Yes, and there is a high correlation between th e action on a Friday and the follow-through on the 
next Moniday—at least on the opening. 
Did you have any inkling of the siize of the impending move on the following Monday? 
Do you know what I really thought was going to ha ppen Monday? I thought the market would open 
lower, go down sharply, and then bounce back to about unchanged. I actually bought out-of-the-
money calls that Friday for protection. 
But you said you thought the market was going down? 
Yes, but I just wanted to have some insurance. A trader once told me, "Saliba, in stealing second, 
you never take your hand off first until your other ha nd is on second." That's the way I am; I always 
have insurance. 
Still, you must have been awfu lly confident that the market  was going sharply lower on 
Monday morning. According to the cover story in Success magazine [April 1988], it sounds 
like you knew the market would collapse. It says you even de liberately chose to go to the 
office instead of the floor to avoid being influe nced out of your position by all the confusion 
on the floor. Isn't that highly unusual for you to go to the office inst ead of the floor on a 
trading day? 
Yes, if I'm trading, I'm on the floor. But that arti cle is completely mislea ding. They wrote it that 
way to sell magazines. They make it sound like I pl anned and plotted to avoi d the floor that day. 
That's not the story. I was concerned about the positions held by my clearing firm. One guy in 
particular had a huge position, which he wasn't clos ing, and I had to spend a great deal of time on 
the phone. Now, that's not as dramatic as the way the magazine wrote it up, but that's what really 
happened. 
Didn't you also sell your seat that day? You must have been really confident the market was 
going down to sell a seat. 
I hit that seat before the market  opened. I figured if I didn't hit the bid for the seat, someone else 
would. Anyway I had seven seats; I just sold one. 
Was this the first time you traded a seat? I mean seats aren't e xactly a liquid market. 
Yes, it was the first time I did it like that: tradin g the seat round turn in one  day. But I have traded 
seats before. I trade them depe nding on my mood in the market. On  balance though, I want to be 
long seats. I believe in our industry. 
But in that circumstance, it did seem like a good trade? 
I figured, "Hey, I have a lot of exposure in seat s—a few million dollars worth—I better take some 
protection." I sold that  seat for $452,000 in the morning and bought it back the next afternoon for 
$275,000. 
How much did you make that Monday? 
That has caused me a lot of head aches. I would rather not say. 
Obviously, your big money was made in the out-o f-the-money puts. What percentage of that 
position did you keep as of Monday's close? 
About 95 percent. 
You kept most of it! But the profits were so huge. Wasn't it tempting to just take it? 
The reason I didn't cover was because I felt my long puts hadn't gone up enough. They all went to 
parity. The puts that were thirty points in-the-money were trading at  $30. In other words, the option  192premiums consisted almost entirely of intrinsic va lue; the market wasn't giving them any time value 
premium. Given the enormous market  volatility, I thought that was crazy. 
So, you figured you would wait till the next day. 
Yes, and do you know what I did to hedge my self? I bought more insurance at the close on 
Monday. I covered hundreds of my short calls. 
You were basically buying more volatility. 
It was the best thing I could have  done. The next day they didn't know what they wanted more of: 
Half the world wanted puts, and half the world wanted calls. 
But everybody wanted volatility. 
That's when the register really started ringing. It was the day that the sun was so close to the earth 
that everybody needed zinc ointment, a nd I was the only guy that had some left. 
Let's take the other side of th e fence: What did the traders who got buried in October do 
wrong? 
They took for granted that Monday would be a nor mal day. They started out long, thinking the 
market was just correcting and was due for a bounce. Then they bought on the way down; they 
bought every dip. 
Did some traders just freeze? 
Sure, some did. I have one friend, who is a m illion-dollar annual earner. On Tuesday morning, I 
walk in and say, "Hey, Jack, what do you think? Are you going to get them today?" But he just 
stood there. He didn't say a word to me. He looked shell shocked. He just kept going over his 
sheets, looking for something to do, but not knowing what to do. So he mi ssed all the opportunity. 
Why was the way you responded to the market  so different from the way your friend 
responded? 
He wasn't sure what his position risk was. I always define my ri sk, and I don't have to worry about 
it. I walk into the pit every day with a clean slate,  so that I can take advantage of what is going on. 
A clean slate sounds like you come in with a fl at position every day, but you obviously hold 
positions overnight. 
I mean that I'm always hedged, and I'm always prepared. 
Do you always know the maximum risk in a po sition that you hold? Do you always know 
what your worst case is? 
Yes. Now, what could ha ppen? The market sits, it explodes , or something in between. But no 
matter what happens, I know my worst case. My loss is always limited. 
Why do so many traders who come to the floor end up losing everything? 
I think the biggest problem with some traders that  come on the floor is that they think they are 
bigger than the market. They don't fear the marketpl ace, and they lose sight of their discipline and 
the hard work ethic. Those are the traders who get blown out. But most guys on the floor really 
work hard. 
What is the biggest misconception th e public has about the marketplace? 
The idea that the market has to go up for them to make money. You can make money in any kind of 
market if you use the right strategies. With future s, options, and the underl ying markets, there are 
enough tools available to set up a game plan for any situation. 
In other words, the public has too much of a bullish bias? 
Yes, it is the American way: The market has to go up. The government never said anything about 
program trading when we were in  a three-year bull market. Once the market started going down, all 
of a sudden, program trading became a major concern, and they set up commissions galore. 
For the average person, like my mom or dad and th eir relatives, the biggest misconception is that 
they think when the market goes up, you make money, and when it goes down, you lose. People 
need to approach it from a more neutral standpoint and say, "I'm goi ng to be a little long in this 
category and short in this category, but limit my  short-side risk because it is infinite."  193How do you handle a losing period? 
How do you lose money? It is either bad day trad ing or a losing position. If it's a bad position that 
is the problem, then you should just get out of it. 
Is that what you do? 
Yes. I either liquidate it or neut ralize it, because then you are ba ck afloat. When you are in a boat 
that springs a leak, you don't drill an other hole to let the water out. 
What if your trading losses are due to your ma king bad decisions? What do you do then? 
Take a day off. If I get myself all wound up, I like to  lay out in the sun and bake for a while and let 
all the strenuous stu ff go out of my head. 
What are the elements of good trading? 
Clear thinking, ability to stay focused, and extrem e discipline. Discipline is number one: Take a 
theory and stick with it. But you also have to be open-minded enough to sw itch tracks if you feel 
that your theory has been prove n wrong. You have to be able to say, "My method worked for this 
type of market, but we are not in  that type of market anymore." 
Trading rules you live by. 
I scale in and scale out of  my positions, so that I can spread out my risk. I don't like to do all of a 
large order right up front. 
What else? 
Always respect the marketplace. Never take anything for granted. Do your homework. Recap the 
day. Figure out what you did right and what you di d wrong. That is one part  of the homework; the 
other part is projec-tive. Wh at do I want to happen tomorrow? What happens if the opposite 
occurs? What happens if nothing happens? Think through all the "what-ifs. " Anticipate and plan, 
rather than react. 
When you made your first few million, did you so ck some of it away to limit your worst case 
possibility?  
No. My trading strategies were growing and I need ed new capital. Then after I made some more, I 
started putting money into other in vestments: real estate, stores, exchange seats, and things like 
that. Then when the market crashed I hate to use that term on Monday, October 19,1 realized that I 
didn't have a big chunk of cash anywhere, so I took a couple of million dollars out of the flow and 
bought T-bills. Then, a few weeks later, I used the money to buy an annuity. 
I guess because your trading style is so focused on limiting losses, the fi rst time you felt the 
need for a safety net was when the market seemed  to be saying that a catastrophe could occur 
and have nothing to do with you. 
Yes. What happens if you have $10 million in your trading account, but they shut down the game? 
How do you set goals? 
Until recently, I set goals on a monetary level. First,  I wanted to become a millionaire before I was 
thirty. I did it before I was twenty-five. Then I d ecided I wanted to make so much a year, and I did 
that. Originally, the goals were all numbers, but the numbers aren't so important anymore. Now, I 
want to do some things that are no t only profitable, but will also be fun. For example, I'm currently 
working on setting up a trading company and a softwa re company. I also want to do the family-type 
thing. 
How do you judge success? 
I used to judge success as being the best in your fi eld, like Bruce Springsteen in rock music. In my 
industry, it would have to be dol lar-wise. Now, I think it is more  quality of life. A lot of people 
think I'm a success, but I don't feel like I'm a success. I really don't. I feel like I've made a lot of 
money, and I've been successful at this one area in  my life. I help the needy, but I don't have that 
family fulfillment. How do you judge success? I don't know. All I know is that all the money in the 
world isn't the answer. 
You thought it was at one time. 
Yes I did. And to be honest, money is important becau se it is influential. See that guy standing over  194there? I don't know him from Adam. But say he came over to talk to us. If he made a really bad 
first impression on me, I might not have much respect  for him. But if you th en told me that guy is 
worth $50 million, and he made it on his own, that w ould completely change my opinion of him. 
That may not be fair, but that's the way it is. 
How does trading affect  your personal life? 
I'm able to handle it well from a business standpoint,  but from a social standpoint it clobbers me. It 
doesn't allow me to give the time  to women and friends that they require. People like to just sit and 
talk sometimes. Unless it is about busine ss, like this with you, I'm out of here. 
Are you always that conscious of time? 
Yes. Most people aren't. They say, "Well, don't you ever just sit home and watch TV?" 
Do you? 
Well, I might have the TV on, but my head is al ways on trading. Last night  I came back from a 
dinner date at midnight. I was tire d and wanted to go to bed, but I was up until 2:00 A.M. figuring 
out trades. It's an addiction. I used  to be much worse. I got lots of grief from former girlfriends 
because I would take my work with me on dates.  I don't do that any more, but I'm always still 
thinking about trading. 
What makes you different? 
I think I can do anything, and I'm not afraid of ha rd work. Right now, for example, I'm working on 
a deal with a French bank to put together a tradin g company. I can't wait until this venture starts up, 
so that I can start working with these kids, trai ning them to be traders. I don't know exactly how 
much the bank is going to give me, but I could ha ve hundreds of millions to work with. I love that 
type of challenge. 
It is important to realize that many of the great traders interviewed in this book were not 
immediately successful. Saliba's initial trading experi ence was so disastrous that it brought him to a 
near suicidal state of mind. However, what thes e traders share is a sense of self-confidence and 
persistence. In the case of early fa ilure, these traits are enough to lead to eventual success. Besides 
allowing him to make a comeback from his early poor start, Saliba's persisten ce also came into play 
at other points in his trading car eer. For example, many others faced  with the type of constant 
ridicule that Saliba was subjected to in the Te ledyne pit might have abandoned their strategy. 
This same Teledyne example also i llustrates another important charact eristic of the s uperior trader: 
the maintenance of rigid risk control, even in difficult circumstances. It must have been very 
tempting for Saliba to trade a larger position size in  the Teledyne pit when he was being derided as 
"one-lot." Instead, he maintained his discipline and continued to trade sm all until his capital had 
grown sufficiently to allow him to increase his position size. 
Working hard and examining many different scenarios so  that he is prepared for all contingencies is 
a critical element of Saliba's success. By anticipa ting all the "what-ifs," he  can take advantage of 
situations such as the October 19 stock slide, instead of being immobilized by such events. For 
many people, the concept of a great trader conj ures up an image of someone using a shoot-from-
the-hip approach, moving in and out of markets with great agility and a near sixth sense. The reality 
is far less glamorous. In the majority of cases, ex ceptional traders owe their success to hard work 
and preparation. In fact, similar to Tony Saliba, many of the very successful traders will do their 
"homework" every night, not allowing leisure or ot her business from interfering with their daily 
regimen of market analysis. When they stray from th at discipline, it usually ends up costing them 
money. In Saliba's own words, referring to a recen tly missed trade due to hi s failure to have his 
orders in while on a business trip, "It cost me ten grand, and all those little  ten grands can add up." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  195Part V-The Psychology of Trading  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  196Dr. Van K. Tharp-The Psychology of Trading  
Dr. Van K. Tharp is a research  psychologist who received his P h.D. from the University of 
Oklahoma, Health Sciences Center, in 1975. He has spent his career studying how stress affects 
human performance. His strongest interest is in the psychology of winning—especially as winning 
applies to the markets. In 1982, Dr. Tharp devel oped his Investment Psyc hology Inventory, a test 
that measures winning and losing traits. Thous ands of investors and speculators—myself 
included—have taken this test, which include s a written evaluation and a ten-minute phone 
consultation. Dr. Tharp has written five books on su ccessful investing which provide the core of his 
investment course. He is a contributing editor for Technical Analysis of Stocks and Commodities 
and has also written numerous articles for other fina ncial publications. Dr. Tharp is a frequent guest 
on financial television and radio programs, a nd has spoken at many investment conferences. 
Dr. Tharp currently devotes himself full time to counseling traders from hi s office in Glendale, 
California, and continuing his research on trading success. A recent focus of this research has been 
interviewing and studying top trader s so that he could create a mode l for success. His basic theory 
is that by teaching the winning traits of the top traders (not specific trad ing methodologies), he can 
dramatically improve the performance of less succe ssful traders and investors. In his most recent 
project, he is attempting to turn  his most successful clients into  "supertraders" by extending his 
normal program of two two-day sessions  into an ongoing semiannual process. 
After I interviewed Dr. Tharp, he as ked whether he could do a video ta pe interview of me as part of 
his ongoing research. Since I thoug ht such an interview might be  helpful in improving my own 
trading performance, I eagerly ag reed. The interview lasted for over four hours. Dr. Tharp has a 
particularly probing questioning st yle. After an initial response to a question, he would ask, "What 
else?" and repeat this process several times. When I could no longer think of any additional 
responses, he would have me shift the direction of  my gaze (he later explained this instruction was 
intended to facilitate accessing different parts of my brain), and sure enough I would think of 
another point I had somehow overlooked. I felt that this interview yielded some important personal 
insights. (One of these self -realizations is br iefly discussed in the next chapter.) 
I would have liked to provide my personal impre ssion of Dr. Tharp's basic course, which includes 
five books and four tapes. However, although I revi ewed the material briefly as background for this 
chapter, the combination of simu ltaneously working at a full-time job and writing this book did not 
leave me with enough time (or energy) to give th e course the serious attention it calls for—a 
personal project I plan for later. I can, however, attest  to the fact that one of the traders interviewed 
in this book served as a subject in Dr. Tharp's project on modeling success and was duly impressed 
with his intellect and insight into successful trading. 
How did you first get interested in the connection between psychology and trading? 
My primary research interest  after graduate school was how  various drugs affect human 
performance. After receiving my Ph.D. in ps ychology, I spent about eight years doing fairly 
standard psychological research. For example, I help ed standardize the current  Field Sobriety Test 
Battery that police throughout the country are still using. While I wa s doing that, I also learned how 
to lose money trading options. In fact, I lost money so fast and so consistent ly that when I finally 
got out of the market, I had to conclude that th e losses had something to do with me. During that 
same time period, I enrolled in a class in prosperity  at the local Church of Religious Science. One 
of the principles taught in  that class is that what happens to  you reflects your mindset. I had read a 
lot on the psychology of trad ing, and while I considered most of th at information to be "folklore," I 
wanted to test it out. I decided to do so by de veloping my Investment Psychology Inventory, a test 
to measure investment strengths a nd weaknesses, as a creative project for that class. No one in the 
class would take it, so I sent it to R. E. Mc Master, the editor of a newsletter to which I was 
subscribing. McMaster took it and then offered it to his subscribers. Overall, I received close to a 
thousand responses and that re ally roused my interest in this area as a career. 
What did you learn in analyzing the responses to your test? Were there any major surprises? 
I had several measures of succe ss built into the test, so I coul d rank the responses according to 
"success level." The investment literature suggeste d ten different areas that  might be important. As  197a result, I designed questions to measure each of t hose areas. I did a number of statistical analyses 
of the data and found a significant correlation between each area and i nvestment success. In 
addition, I found that those ten area s could be grouped into three ma jor clusters, which I label the 
psychological factor, the management and discip line factor, and the decision-making factor. 
Although I've since refined the test, I still use the same three major cl usters. In addition, I still keep 
the ten original areas, and I've  added an extra one—intuition. 
What are the eleven areas you measure? 
Well, the psychological factor has five areas. These incl ude a well-rounded pers onal life, a positive 
attitude, the motivation to make money, lack of conflict, and res ponsibility for results. Motivation 
to make money is not significantly correlated with su ccess, but I keep it in the test because lack of 
such motivation plus high c onflict is very significant. 
There are three factors in the decision-making area. These include  a solid knowledge of technical 
factors in the market, an aptitude for maki ng sound decisions without common biases, and the 
ability to think independently. Inci dentally, knowledge of technical f actors has little relationship to 
success based on the test scores. 
Also, there are three management-discipline factors.  One needs risk control and the ability to be 
patient, hi addition, I also include intuition in  this category. Althou gh I have not found any 
relationship between intuition and trading success, I keep the factor in the test because it is in-
teresting to me. 
Given those areas, what are the char acteristics of the losing trader? 
The composite profile of a losing trader would be someone who is highly stressed and has little 
protection from stress, has a negative outlook on life a nd expects the worst, has a lot of conflict in 
his/her personality, and blames others when things  go wrong. Such a person would not have a set of 
rales to guide their behavior and would be more lik ely to be a crowd follow er, hi addition, losing 
traders tend to be disorganized and impatient. They  want action now. Most lo sing traders are not as 
bad as the composite profile would suggest. Th ey just have part of the losing profile. 
You now consult with many traders. How did you get started in that? 
After I started using the test re gularly, people began to ask me wh at to do about their particular 
problems. Since investment psychology is a rath er unique area of study, I found I didn't know how 
to respond to many of their questions. As a result, I decided to write a pamphlet on each of the ten 
areas—both to learn about the areas myself and to provide investors with a source of help. The first 
pamphlet turned into a book. I decided at that poi nt to cover the subject matter in five workbooks 
which would constitute a course in the psychology of investing/tr ading. After I finished the second 
workbook, I started training in Neuro-Linguistic Pr ogramming (NLP). NLP is really a science of 
how to duplicate success, and I wa s able to incorporate a number  of those techniques into my 
course. The development of the course natura lly led to a private consulting service. 
Have your ideas and concepts changed from what  they were early in your research? 
I designed the test to predict who could win and who couldn't. Now, I believe that anyone can win 
if they are committed to do so. Primar ily, it's just a matter of learning how. 
Too many people get stuck by the beliefs they hold, ye t they continue to cli ng to those old beliefs. 
My beliefs, in contrast, are constantly evolving,  and I think it's because I value them according to 
their utility. Thus, I'm w illing to admit most of my beliefs are probably wrong. For example, there 
may be people who could not be successful in trading even if they were committed to doing so. But 
right now, it's most useful for me to believe th at anyone can win. When I hold that belief, I am 
much more effective at helping people become winners. 
Could you provide some specific case exampl es of people who succeeded or failed in 
consultation? 
One trader who came to me hadn't been able to trade for over a year. He wanted me to get him 
trading before he did the full consultation. As a result, I had him drop by one morning for about 
forty-five minutes. I gathered some information a nd made an educated guess that he had a conflict 
problem. He then went through an exercise that took about ten minutes. It  took him two weeks to 
mentally integrate the results of that exercise, but after that he was trading again. He'd spent a lot of  198money and done a lot of things to correct the prob lem and none of it had worked. Yet, it only took a 
ten-minute exercise and two weeks of integr ating the results to solve his problem. 
I tried that with anothe r person who was unable to afford my consulting fee, for whom a simple 
exercise of that nature didn't work. His problem had nothing to do with his inves ting. Although he 
was in his late forties, he was still a little boy in  that he couldn't accept adult responsibilities. He 
still lived with his mother, and his whole lifestyle supported be ing a child. The only reason he 
wanted to trade was to be able to continue that lifestyle. I doubt  that I could have helped him 
without a major commitment on his part to change  his lifestyle, which he was unwilling to give. 
Another client made minor adjust ments after two days of consul ting. He was reluctant to do the 
follow-up because he thought it would probably be s uperfluous. But he eventu ally decided to do it. 
I spent another two days listening to him talk and th en we did a simple exercise together. At the end 
of that exercise, he was a totally changed person (although it probably took him a week to integrate 
the effects of that exercise). He called me tw o months later and said  he had made over $650,000 
trading in the markets. 
In the case of a trader who uses a nonquant ifiable approach (for example, "I buy or sell 
whenever I get a feeling about the market's im pending direction from the chart patterns"), 
how do you distinguish whether trading proble ms are related to lack of skill or to 
psychological impediments to success? 
Before I take someone on as a client, I need to know that they have some  sort of methodology that 
they think works. I determine what evidence they have of that. Can they, for example, convince 
me? Have they tested that methodology? Does thei r testing amount to a hindsight evaluation, or is 
it based on actual trading signals that  one can follow. I also am convin ced that it is difficult to make 
money day trading or trading in a short time frame, so I am skep tical about anyone  who wants me 
to help them day trade successfully. 
At the same time, I think that lack of skill is, in itself, a psychological impediment to trading. 
People don't develop a systematic approach or don't test their approach because of poor judgment, 
lack of goals, internal conflict, et c. So, perhaps the area they need help in is overcoming internal 
resistance to developing a systema tic approach to the ma rket. If somebody came to me and said that 
was the problem they wanted help with, I would have no problem at all accepting that person as a 
client. 
What are the primary psychological impediments that keep most people  from being winning 
traders? How can they deal with each of those problems? 
What typically happens is that when people appr oach the markets, they bring their personal 
problems with them. The markets are a natural pl ace to act out those problems, but not to solve 
them. Most people end up leaving the markets, but a few decide that they need a system to trade 
more effectively. Those people who do adopt a syst ems approach usually just end up transferring 
their problems from dealing with the market to dealing with their system of trading. 
One of the basic problems that most traders face  is dealing with risk. For example, two primary 
rales to successful speculative trading are: Cut your losses short and let your profits ran. Most 
people cannot deal with those two rales. For exam ple, if making money is important to you—as it 
is to most people who play investment games—then you will probably have trouble taking small 
losses. As a result, small losses turn into moderate  losses, which are even harder to take. Finally, 
the moderate losses turn into big losses, which you are forced to take—all because it was so hard to 
take a small loss. Similarly, when people have a prof it, they want to take it right away. They think, 
"I'd better take this now before it gets away." The bigger the profit becomes, th e harder it is to resist 
the temptation to take it now. The simple truth is that most people are risk-aversive in the realm of 
profits—they prefer a sure, smaller gain to a wise gamble fo r a larger gain—and risk-seeking in the 
realm of losses—they prefer an unwise gamble to a sure loss. As a result, most people tend to do 
the opposite of what is required for success. They cut their profits short and let their losses run. 
If you think of trading as a game and that a mistak e is not following the rale s of the game, then it 
becomes much easier to follow thes e two rales. You should review your rales at the beginning of 
the day and review your trading at the end of the day. If you followed your rales, even if you lost 
money, pat yourself on the back. If  you didn't follow your rales, then  mentally rehearse what you  199did and give yourself more appr opriate choices in the future. 
The second majorproblem people have is dealing w ith stress. Stress really takes two forms: worry 
and the biological fight/flight response. Our brains have a limited capacity for processing 
information. If your mind is preoccupied with wo rry, that worry takes up most of the decision 
space, and you don't have enough capacity left to perform effectively. 
One aspect of the fight/flight respon se is that it causes people to narrow their focus. They revert to 
earlier well-practiced response patt erns. For example, a common decision that people make under 
stress is not to decide. They do what they did when they were  a beginner. They do what their 
broker advises. In short, they do anything simple. Simple solutions  are rarely correct. When people 
are stressed, they also tend to be crowd followers. The behavior of others provides a simple 
example to follow. Crowd followers don't have to  make decisions, but crowd following is a sure 
way to lose money in the markets. 
A second important effect of the fight/flight re sponse is that it causes people to expend more 
energy. When faced with stressful events, people give  more effort to the few alternatives they do 
consider. They keep on doing what they were doing—only they do it harder. Putting more energy 
into trading decisions does not help you make more money. Instead you will tend to make quick, 
irrational choices, which use up some of that ex cess energy. You probably put more energy into a 
losing position by actively resisting closing it out. The result is a bigger loss. In summary, the 
fight/flight response will decreas e your performance by causing you to narrow your choices and 
concentrate more energy on the remaining alternatives. 
The solution for dealing with stress is to work on the causes and to deve lop stress protectors. I 
would recommend that people with this problem go into a stress management program. Also, it is 
important to understand that many stressful events are such because of the way you perceive them. 
Change those perceptions and you will change th e event itself. For example, winners typically 
differ from losers in their att itude about losses. Most people become anxious about losses, yet 
successful speculators have learned that an essential ingredient to winning is to make it OK to lose. 
Since most people in our culture are taught that  only winning is acceptable, most investors must 
change their beliefs about losses to become successful. 
The third major problem that people have is deali ng with conflict. People ha ve different parts of 
themselves, each of which has a positive intention. For example, someone might have a part to 
make money, a part to protect him from failure, a part to make hi m feel good about himself, a part 
which looks after the welfare of the family, etc.  Now, once you establish these parts, you usually 
allow them to operate subconscious ly. What happens is the parts continually adopt new behaviors 
to cany out their intentions. Sometimes, those ne w behaviors can produce major conflicts. This 
model of conflict is one of  my most useful beliefs. I'm not sayi ng that people actually have parts, 
but it is very useful in helping people solve their trading problems for me to believe that. You just 
have to make them aware of their parts and then  conduct a formal negotiati on between the parts so 
that each part is satisfied. If possi ble, you also want to integrate the parts so that they join together. 
I find the concept of people having different part s in conflict with each other a little difficult 
to conceptualize. Could you provide an example? 
I worked with a floor trader whose father was fa irly successful. His father  was not a good model for 
him, however, in that he was an alcoholic. As a result, he develope d a part to protect himself from 
being like his father. He could make about $75,000 per year trading, but if he made any more than 
that, this part kicked in to make sure that he  would not become too succe ssful. He was the one who 
made $650,000 in about two months after we had completed the parts negotiation. 
Are you implying that some peop le actually want to lose on a subconscious level because it 
fulfills some other positive intention? How common is that? 
Half the traders I work with have problems  of this nature. I think it's very common. 
So far, you've cited poor risk attitudes, stress,  and conflict as impedime nts to trading success. 
Are there any other major problems people have with the markets? 
A fourth major problem is that ma ny people allow their emotions to  control their trading. In fact, 
most trading problems appear to involve emotional control in some  manner. I know of at least ten 
methods of helping people control their mental st ates. An easy method that people can adopt right  200away is simply to control posture, breathing, and muscle tension. If you change those factors, you 
will probably find that you change your emotional state. 
Finally, the last major problem is making decisi ons. Although there are many facets to decision-
making problems, what most peopl e do is bring their normal method of making decisions to trading 
the markets. For example, think about what you go through in order to buy a new car.  You have to 
think about the model, make, deal, service, cost, accessories, etc. And it probably takes you a week 
or more to evaluate those factors and make a decision. Most people bring that same method of 
making decisions to trading and it ju st doesn't work. It takes too much time. So, the solution is to 
adopt a trading system that gives you signals to act. But most people with a trading system continue 
to apply their normal method of ma king decisions to the signals given to them by their trading 
system. And, of course, that doesn't work. The best method that I've found of dealing with long, 
ineffective decision-making problems is to short circuit them through a process called anchoring. 
That process is a little to o involved to explain here. 
Do you believe that most people can be successf ul traders if they learn to eliminate negative 
emotions? 
Well, that assumes that negative emotions are the cause of trading problems. I think they are just a 
symptom of the basic problem. In most cases, I don' t believe it's even necessa ry to solve specific 
problems to produce success—you simply have to teach  people to do things in an effective manner. 
The teaching process, however, involves working with how people think, and most trainers do not 
emphasize that. 
Right now, I consider myself to be an expert modeler. By that , I mean that if someone can do 
something well, then I can figure out how they do it and teach those skills to anyone else. I'm 
concentrating on modeling trading and investment excellence. So naturally, I believe that I can 
teach anyone who is committed to being a successful trader to be one of the best. 
Are superior traders better becaus e of keener analytical skills, or because they have better 
emotional control? 
Better emotional control, but  I think that both of thos e factors are overemphasized. 
So what does it take to  duplicate successful trading? 
There are three primary factors i nvolved in duplicating success—belief s, mental states, and mental 
strategies. If you duplicate the way the best traders use t hose three factors for every aspect of the 
trading task, then you can duplicat e their results. As a nontrading example, most martial arts 
experts believe that it takes years of practice to break a board with your bare hand. I was able to 
observe someone for about fifteen minutes and then break two k-in ch pine boards with my hand. I 
even showed my son (who was ten at the time) how to do it. That's the power behind modeling. 
What happens with most experts is that they are unconsciously competent. They do things well, 
which means they do them automatically. For ex ample, most people are unconsciously competent 
at driving a car. You don't even think about it when you do it. When someone  who is unconsciously 
competent tries to explain what he or she is doin g to someone else, much of what is important is 
left out. Thus, my focus is to discover the missing pieces and help people install those pieces. 
Let's talk about the first factor: beliefs. Ho w are beliefs important to trading success? 
Let me give you an example from another modeling project. The Army modeled the rifle skills of 
the two best sharpshooters in the U.S. They were then able to develop a training class for Army 
recruits in which they reduced the training ti me from four to two da ys, while increasing the 
qualification rate from 80 to 100 percent. In addi tion, they were able to use the same knowledge to 
help the top shooters improve their skills. The info rmation they gathered about shooting beliefs was 
particularly revealing. 
The two top shooters, for example, believed: 
• Shooting well is important for my survival. 
• Hunting is fun. 
• Mental rehearsal is importan t to successful performance. 
• If I miss a shot, it has something to do with my performance.  201One of the two top shooters, when they were in  competition together, always won. And you 
could tell the difference between the two in acco rdance with their beliefs. For example, the 
best shooter believed that it was important to rehearse an entire 1,000-round match the prior 
evening, whereas the second best shooter only belie ved that mental rehearsal was important. 
In addition, the best shooter believed that it was important to hit the center of the bull's eye 
on each shot (even though you didn't get ex tra points for that), whereas the second best 
shooter believed that it was only important to hit the bull's eye. Can you understand why one 
was better than the other just from their beliefs? 
Now, contrast the beliefs of top shooters with the beliefs of new recruits coming into the Army. 
The latter might believe: 
• Guns are evil; they kill people. 
• If they shoot this weapon t oo many times, they might go deaf. 
• If they miss the target, it means the gun is misaligned. 
I think, just on beliefs alone, you can  begin to understand why the t op shooters were so much better 
than the raw recruits. 
Now, let me explain some of my  findings in working with top tr aders. You might find some of 
these beliefs confirmed in other interviews in your book. Generally, I find that top traders believe: 
• Money is NOT important. 
• It is OK to lose in the markets. 
• Trading is a game. 
• Mental rehearsal is important for success. 
• They've won the game before they start. 
Although there are a lot more than five critical beliefs, I think these five are among the most 
important. Most people approach trading to make a lot of money, and that is one of the primary 
reasons they lose. Because money is so importa nt, they have trouble ta king losses and letting 
profits ran. In contrast, when you think of trading as a game and play by certain rules, then it 
becomes much easier to follow those two golden rales. 
In addition, because of mental rehearsal and ex tensive planning, top traders have already gone 
through all the trial and error in their mind before th ey begin. As a result, they know they are going 
to win in the long ran, and that makes the little setbacks much easier to deal with. 
You mentioned that winners know they've won the game before they start. Although I can 
easily see how such confidence would be benefi cial for the establishe d winning trader, might 
the impact of this trait actually be reversed for the novice trader? For example, in your first 
week on skis, confidence about your ability to go down the expert slope might not be such a 
great quality. How does the less expert trad er distinguish between justified and misplaced 
confidence? 
The top traders that I've worked with began thei r careers with an extensive study of the markets. 
They developed and refined models of how to trade.  They mentally rehearsed what they wanted to 
do extensively until th ey had the belief that they would wi n. At this point, they had both the 
confidence and the commitment nece ssary to produce success. In addi tion, they also had the entire 
constellation of beliefs I just described. As a result,  I believe that there are three major differences 
between justified confidence and mi splaced confidence. First of all, justified confidence comes 
from a constellation of beliefs, such as the one I just described. If a tr ader has confidence and 
nothing else, he is probably in a lot of trouble. Second, justified confidence comes from extensive 
testing of some sort of model of trading. If you don't have a m odel that you have properly tested, 
then your confidence is probably misplaced. Third, justified confidence come s with an extensive 
commitment to being successful as a trader. Mo st people who want to be traders are not com-
mitted—they just think they are. There is a poem  by W. N. Murray, of the Scottish Himalayan 
expedition, that says: "That the moment that one definitely co mmits oneself, then Providence 
moves too." 
If you are really committed, then not only are you certain that you are doing the right thing, but 
somehow events just seem to occur to help you. If  you are really committed to  being a trader, then 
you probably have an understanding at some level of what I'm talking about. You probably even 
understand that those events th at help you might be big losses. If you are not committed, on the  202other hand, then you are probably saying, "I don't understand what Tharp is saying. I'm committed, 
but events certainly have not been helping me." 
Earlier, you mentioned "mental states" as th e second critical factor in modeling success. 
Could you explain what you mean by that? 
If you ask people to list their trad ing or investment problems, they  are of two types—problems they 
don't own and mental state control problems. Pr oblems they don't own consist of blaming the 
markets, blaming floor traders or  locals, blaming insider trading, blaming their broker, or blaming 
their system for what goes wrong. We have a natu ral tendency to blame something other than 
ourselves for what happens. Society promotes it. For example, the recent media coverage of 
program trading virtually implies that investors w ho lost money in the stock market did so because 
of this activity, rather than because of any fault of their own. Yet, when you blame something other 
than yourself, you can continue to repeat the mistake because it was the result of something beyond 
your control. 
The best thing an investor can do, when things go wrong, is to determine how he or she produced 
those results. Now, I don't mean that you should bl ame yourself for your mistakes either. I mean 
that at some point in time, for any situation,  you made a choice that produced those results. 
Determine what that choice point was and give your self other options to take when you encounter a 
similar choice point in the future. Change the decisi on at similar choice points in the future and you 
will change the results you get. And by imagini ng doing so now, you can make it easy to select 
those alternatives in the future. 
When people own their own problems, they discover th at their results usually stem from some sort 
of mental state. Common examples are: 
• I'm too impatient with the markets. 
• I get angry at the markets. 
• I'm afraid at the wrong time. 
• I'm too optimistic about what will happen. 
These are just a few examples of  mental state problems. Once you identify a mental state problem, 
you can do something about it because this sort of problem is within your control. I've already 
mentioned how one can use body post ure, breaming, and muscle contro l to manipulate one's mental 
state. To try this out for yourself, go into a shopping mall and notice how other people walk. 
Duplicate a dozen or so walks fo r yourself and notice how your mental state changes with each one. 
I'm not saying that controlling your mental state is the magic soluti on to trading success. It's just 
part of the answer. But when you admit that the an swer is within yourself, you've come a long way. 
The realization that you are res ponsible for the results you get is the key to success ful investing. 
Winners know they are responsible for th eir results; losers think they are not. 
Can you give a practical example of how someone can control their mental state? 
Well, mental state manipulation is what most pe ople call discipline. I teach  people a very simple 
procedure that they can use righ t away. For example, suppose you ar e at your desk and you become 
aware that you are in a mental st ate that you would like to change . Get up out of the chair. Walk 
away about four feet and then look at how you looked in that chair. Notice you r posture, your 
breathing, your facial expr essions. Then imagine how you would look if you had the sort of mental 
state you would like. When you can see that clearly, sit down in th e chair again and assume the 
position that you just imagined. That exercise works for almost any situation as it involves several 
important principles—changing your body postur e, seeing yourself fr om a more objective 
viewooint, and imagining a more resourceful state. 
Please elaborate on mental st rategies—the third element you cited earlier as critical to 
duplicating success. Could you  provide some examples? 
To understand strategies, you have to understand how people think. People think in the same 
modalities as their five senses, that is, in terms of visual images, sounds, feelings, and for some 
people, tastes and smells. Those five modalities are to  mental strategies as the alphabet is to a great 
novel, or as musical notes are to  a great symphony. It's not the el ements, but the way in which the 
elements are put together. A mental strate gy is really the sequence in which you think. 
Rather than explain a complex topi c in detail, which I think is beyond the scope of this interview,  203let me give you two examples. Firs t, imagine that you have a tradi ng system that gives you specific 
signals. Since most signals are visual, such as a pa rticular chart pattern or  certain signals on your 
computer, imagine that your system gives you visual  signals. Now, try on the following strategy: 
• See the signal. 
• Recognize that it is familiar. 
• Tell yourself what might go wrong if you take it. 
• Feel bad about it. 
Could you trade effectively using that strategy? Would you even take the signal? Probably not! 
What if you used the following strategy? 
• See the signal. 
• Recognize that it is familiar. 
• Feel good about it. 
Could you trade from that signal? Probably. So even though the two strategies are quite similar, 
they lead to very different result s in terms of trading. If you are trading a sy stem, you need a simple 
strategy like the last one in  order to use it effectively. 
Two of the top traders that you  used in your research in modeling success have completely 
different trading styles. One is very mechanic al, while the other uses a much more intuitive 
approach. Could you contrast their diffe rences and compare their similarities? 
First, let me talk about their similarities, because they are ex tensive. In fact, when you find 
extensive similarities between two excellent traders who seem so different, then you can begin to 
assume that those similarities are essential to  successful trading. Both traders, for example, 
developed models for how the markets work and did extensive research to test those models. 
Although their ideas are very differe nt, I think the process of devel oping and testing some sort of 
model is probably very important. In addition, both traders share all the same beliefs that I men-
tioned earlier as common to successful traders. Th ird, both traders are very aware of their purpose 
in life and as a trader. They believe they are part  of a "bigger picture" and they just go with the 
flow. 
The mechanical trader is very logical. He construc ts his models visually in his imagination. He is 
very precise in his language and thinking. His mode ls tend to focus on his concept of how to trade 
successfully and of how the economy works. He does not believe that his models are adequate until 
they can be converted into algorith ms for the computer that match his own mental processes. As a 
result of this belief, he has computerized his models, modifying both his constructed image and his 
computer output, until both models match—in his wo rds, "until they both look right." This is a very 
slow and laborious process. I think it hinders his decision making on everyday events, and he tends 
to agree with me, but it helps him in the long ru n. When his mental image and the computer model 
match, he virtually takes himself out of the trad ing picture. The computer does everything, so at 
that point, decision making is easy for him. 
The intuitive trader, in contrast , has developed a model of how he  thinks markets operate, rather 
than a model of how to trade suc cessfully. He also believes that the markets are constantly evolving 
and that it is more important to keep up with changes in the market  than to test his models by 
developing an algorithm to computerize them. He trad es from his expectations of what the markets 
will do, which are visualizations. But I think that  he tends to convert his visualizations into 
feelings. Feelings actually are a mode of thinking, but they are difficult to communicate to others or 
to computerize. As a result, he believes that exer cises such as computerizing a trading system are a 
waste of time. Remember that his main emphasis is  to explain how markets work (rather than how 
to trade), and he believes that the markets are constantly evolving. As a result, he has difficulty 
explaining how he trades to anyone else. He just calls it  intuitive. At  the same time, he makes day-
to-day decisions easily—a distinct contrast to the mechanical trader who is uncomfortable until he 
has proven his work by computerizing it. 
What are the most difficult problems to solve? 
I think there are only two difficult problems. One is  lack of commitment to trading. People are not 
going to do what I tell them to do unless they are committed to be coming a good trader, so I don't 
see many noncommitted traders. It's only o ccasionally, when I do a free or reduced-rate  204consultation, that I see traders w ith this sort of problem. The ma n who wanted to remain a little 
boy, and was trying to use trading as a means of accomplishing that, was a classic example. I don't 
make the mistake of seeing noncommitted traders too often. 
The second most difficult situation is the trader  who does not own his problems. This person can 
continue to repeat his problems because he never ge ts at the source. Once again, I usually don't see 
these people. When people come to me, they r ealize that they produce their own problems, 
although, to some extent, everyone has problem s that they don't own—even my clients. 
Among the people who come to see me, I think the mo st difficult type is the compulsive gambler. 
Since these people typically crave the action of the markets, they are not likely to want my help 
until they are heavily into debt. At  that point, I refer them to Gamblers Anonymous or to some local 
source forhelp. However, I have had one compulsi ve trader among my clients. He's now in my 
super-trader program. I've simply channeled his compulsiveness from the markets into working on 
himself. 
I'm not sure that correcting trading problems is always the answer though. For example, one 
approach to teaching a class on trading would be to give everyone  the fundamentals in the first 
session and a simple trading syst em in the second. You could then spend the remaining sessions 
dealing with their problems trading that system. Th at would probably be a ve ry effective class. On 
the other hand, you could conduct the same class by giving them the fundamentals. Then you might 
give them the beliefs, mental st ates, and mental strategies necessa ry to trade the system. Finally, 
you might give them the system. I'm willing to bet that the second method would be more effective 
than the first. At least that  is the direction I'm heading. 
Talk about the origins, concepts, and direction of your super-trader program. 
It all began on Christmas Eve one y ear, when that one trader called and told me that he had made 
$650,000 in the two months since I had finished worki ng with him. In a sense, I felt that we had 
only started working together. Th e more I thought about it, the more the question kept popping into 
my mind: "What if we pushed this to the limits? What is he capable of accomplishing?" So the idea 
of the super-trader program was born from those t houghts. I called him up and suggested the idea to 
him. Naturally, he was all for it. 
About four of my clients have now  graduated to the super-trader pr ogram. It simply means that I 
continue to work with these peopl e on a regular basis (usually semiar mualry). The idea is to stretch 
their performance to the limits. Many people aren't  ready for that, but I have enough among my 
clients who are. Who knows, in thre e or four years, I might just ha ve about fifty top traders that I 
work with on a continual basis! Incidentally, I fi nd that my best clients now make excellent models 
to use to study top traders. 
I sometimes have dreams which involve impe nding market direction. Although these are 
rather infrequent, they prove right a high percentage of the time. Is this unusual? 
I imagine that it's quite common because people tell me  that all the time, especially top traders. For 
example, both the mechanical and intuitive super-tra ders that we ta lked about earlier expressed that 
they had dreams about the market that were am azingly accurate. But most traders say that such 
dreams are infrequent enough so th at they could not trade on th em regularly. This phenomenon 
may even occur more frequently than one might imagine—in symbolic form. But most people do 
not bother to interpret their dreams, so they miss the symbolic predictions. However, I must admit 
that although it interests me, I have not i nvestigated this area very extensively. 
I know of lots of people of genius level who clai m that some of their cr eativity comes from their 
dreams. Michael Jackson claims he doesn't wr ite his songs—they just come to him. Paul 
McCartney said that he heard th e song "Yesterday" in a dream. Einstein essentially dreamed the 
theory of relativity. I think ther e are probably a lot of famous exam ples of this sort. It all boils 
down to what intuition really  is, but don't ask me to expl ain it. I don't understand it—YET! 
I assume that the reason you have  not tried trading again is that  you perceive that it would 
interfere with your objectivity in  dealing with your clients. Yet, given all that you have 
learned about successful trading during the past five years, I imagine there must be some 
temptation to try it again. How do you handle this  conflict? What do you e nvision as the long-term 
resolution?   205There are two reasons I don't trade. The first is the reason you mentioned about objectivity with 
clients. If I'm helping someone trade and I ha ve conflicting positions, then I may not be very 
objective about what they are doing. An equally im portant reason, however, is that I am fully com-
mitted to doing what I am doing. I love helping ot her people, writing, giving talks, and so on. I'm 
very happy doing that. It is also a sixty-hour per w eek job right now. If I wanted to start trading, 
then I would have to devote almost as much tim e to doing that, at least at the beginning. Why 
should I do that and give up what  I already know I love doing? Pl ayer coaches, in the history of 
most sports, usually are not that eff ective at either coaching or playing. 
Your question also assumes that I am committed to trade, and as a result there is a conflict. 
Actually, I find that as I get more and more into  helping others become successful, I have less and 
less interest in trading myself. I'm investing in myself and in my business right now. I constantly 
work at improving my skills and knowledge, and that is paying off forme. Why should I dilute that 
effort? Perhaps some time in the future, I will decide that I have done everything I can do, or 
perhaps I'll want to change what I'm doing, or perh aps I'll just want a brea k. For example, three to 
four years from now I might just be working with fifty or more t op quality traders. If that happens, 
then maybe I'll also trade. But for the near future, it doesn't seem very likely. 
 
 
  206The Trade-A Personal Experience  
In the course of conducting the interviews for th is book, I came to realize that one of my primary 
motives for the entire project wa s a quest for self-discovery. Alt hough I have been a net profitable 
trader over the years (substantially multiplying a small initial stake on two separate occasions), I 
had a definite sense of failure about my tradi ng. Given the extent of my  knowledge and experience 
about markets and trading, as well as the fact  that on numerous occasions I had correctly 
anticipated major price moves, I felt that my wi nnings were small potatoes compared to what I 
should have made. 
In one of my trips for this book, on one evening, I was interviewed at length about my trading by 
Dr. Van Tharp, and the very next  evening, I had a probing conversat ion about my trading with the 
very perceptive Ed Seykota. This back-to-back experience caused me to focus intensely on the 
flaws that had prevented me from reaching what I perceived to be my true potential as a trader. 
As a result of this self-examination, I came to reali ze that one of my great errors had been failing to 
exploit major price moves that I had correctly anticipated. Invariab ly, my initial position would be 
far too small, given the potential I perceived in such trades. This mistake was then compounded by 
a highly premature liquidation of the position. Typicall y, I would take profits on the first leg of the 
price move, with the intention of reentering th e position on a correction. The problem was that 
subsequent corrections usually fell short of my reentry points and, refusing to chase the market, I 
ended up watching the rest of the price move unfold while I was on th e sidelines. I vowed to myself 
that the next time such a situation would arise, I w ould make a concentrated effort to come closer to 
realizing the true potential of the trade. 
I did not have to wait very long. Two weeks late r, while on a plane to Chicago to conduct some 
further interviews, I was thinking about my review  of the price charts th e previous evening. I 
recalled that I had come away with the distinct imp ression that precious meta l prices were ready to 
move higher, even though the foreign currency ma rkets appeared vulnerable to further price 
erosion. Suddenly, the trade I should have made became crystal clear. Given my combination of 
expectations, a trade of long prec ious metals and short foreign cu rrencies would be particularly 
attractive. (Since these markets normally move  in the same direction, the combined position 
implied less risk than an outri ght long position in pr ecious metals.) I made a mental note to 
generate some charts on this trade at my first opportunity. 
The next morning, I found a quote machine capable of generating price ch arts and sat down to 
evaluate various price relationships . First, I looked at the interrel ationships between silver, gold, 
and platinum and decided that silver was my pr eferred buy among the metals. Then I reviewed the 
interrelationships between the various foreign curre ncies and decided that the Swiss franc appeared 
to be the weakest currency. Having made these tw o determinations, I then reviewed charts of the 
silver/Swiss franc ratio for various time spect rums, ranging from ten years to one month. 
This analysis led me to the conclusion that we were at the brink of a possible multiyear advance of 
silver relative to the Swiss franc. Although I had intended not to trad e because my traveling 
prevented me from paying attention to the market s, the potential of the trade seemed so dynamic 
that I had to put on at least a base position. To be done properly, a ratio trade requires 
approximately equal dollar positions in each market. I quickly calculated that at the prevailing price 
levels, it would require approximately three long s ilver contracts to balance one short Swiss franc 
contract. 
I looked at a short-term chart of the silver/Swiss franc pr ice ratio. To my dismay, the price ratio had 
already moved sharply in the direction of my in tended trade since my r ealization about it the 
previous morning. Even on that morning's opening, th e trade could have been implemented at much 
more favorable price levels. As I was trying to decide what to do, the silver/Swiss franc ratio 
continued to move higher and higher. I decided th at I had to act to prev ent the possibility of 
missing this trade altogether. I im mediately called in an order esta blishing the minimum position of 
long three silver contracts and s hort one Swiss franc contract. No sooner had I placed the order than 
the price ratio seemed to reach its peak and bega n retreating. The ratio pulled back further during 
the next two days. As it turned out, I had managed to implement the trade at the exact worst 
possible moment in time since the inception of my idea. However, the silver/Swiss franc price ratio  207quickly recovered, and a few days later I was well ahead. 
At this point, I thought about my recent realizati on regarding my continued failure to adequately 
profit from major price moves. I decided to mainta in my position and, moreover, selected a reaction 
point for doubling up the position. The correction came about a week later and I followed my game 
plan. My timing proved good, as the trade once again rebounded in my favor—this time with 
double the initial position. Given my account size (approximately $70,000 at the time), the long six 
silver/short two Swiss franc posi tion was about twice as large as the one I normally would have 
held. My efforts to correct my aforementioned tradi ng flaw seemed to be paying off, as the trade 
raced in my favor during the following two weeks.  Within a month of putting on the trade, my 
account was up over 30 percent. 
I now faced a dilemma: On the one hand, my new- found realization suggested that I hang on to the 
trade for the long run. On the other hand, one of my other rales is that if you are ever lucky enough 
to realize a very large profit on a trade very quickly, take it, because you will usually get an 
opportunity to reenter the trade at considerably mo re favorable levels. The second rale came to 
mind when the silver/Swiss fr anc price ratio began falling. 
A cursory examination of the price charts suggeste d it might be prudent to take at least partial 
profits. I should have done more analysis to reach a decision. However, the combination of having 
undertaken a new job, while at the same time writin g this book, left me with  very little time and 
energy to focus on other areas—trading included. Instead of doing the necessary work, I made a 
snap judgment to stay with the trade. 
The trade now moved swiftly agains t me, and within a week, I had given back a si gnificant portion 
of my earlier gains. 
Although a week earlier, I had ratio nalized that my substantial profits would give me enough of a 
comfort cushion in the event of a reaction, now that  such a reaction had occu rred, I found that I had 
seriously misjudged my comfort level. Suddenly, I was concerned that I might give back all my 
profits, and possibly even ride the trade into a loss.  I could not decide whether to blow out of the 
trade or stay with it as initially planned. 
That night I had a dream. I was talking to a friend of mine, who is a devel oper of software for the 
analysis of futures and options markets, but not  a trader. In my dream, he had begun trading. We 
were talking about trading and my current di lemma regarding the silver/Swiss franc position. 
My friend commented on my predicament, "Everybody gets what they want out of the markets." I 
replied, "You sound just like Ed Seykota." This sounde d a bit odd to me, since as far as I knew, he 
did not even know Seykota. To my surprise, he an swered, "I have been talking to Ed Seykota for a 
while and I have been winning in my trading ever since." 
He had a sheet in front of him, with one of  the columns indicating his month-to-month ending 
equity. I glanced at the sheet and was astounded to see that the last figure exceeded $18 million. I 
exclaimed, "Bert, you have made $18 million in th e market! I hope you plan to take a few million 
out for safekeeping." "No, I need all the money for tr ading," he replied. "But that is crazy," I said. 
"Take $3 or $4 million out, and that way you will be  sure then that no matter what happens, you 
will come out way ahead." "I know what I am doing, and as long as I do my homework on the 
markets every day, I am not concerned," he replied. 
His answer had implied, quite correctly, that I di d not diligently do my homework on the markets 
every day. His point, although unstated, was quite clear : If I did my work on the markets every day, 
I wouldn't have any trouble understanding why he did not need to pull out se veral million dollars in 
profits from his account to feel c onfident that he would not lose back all his profits in trading. 
"You say you don't have enough time each day to do your work on the markets. You are too busy 
with your new job and writing your book. Here, le tme show you something." He started citing 
assumptions regarding the sales of my book, royaltie s per copy sold, and the total hours I had spent 
writing the book. He then scribbled various calcula tions on a yellow pad. He arrived at a final 
figure of $18.50 per hour. "Here," he said, "this is  what you are making on your book." The tone of 
his voice implied that I was crazy to jeopardize tens of thousands of dollars in my trading for such a 
paltry sum. (Actually, the $18.50 estimate is probably  wildly overinflated, but remember this was a 
dream.) 
It was no coincidence that this dream occurred th e night after editing the section of the Marty  208Schwartz interview dealing with  his diligence in doing his da ily homework on the markets. I 
realized that there are no shortcuts. If you want  to be a good trader, you have to do your work on 
the markets every day. If there is not enough time, you have to make time. The costs for straying 
from this daily discipline, in terms of lost profit oppor tunities as well as losses, can be very 
substantial. The message my subconscious seemed  to be crying out was:  If you are going to be 
serious about trading, you have to reestablish your time priorities. 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  209Postscript-Dreams and Trading  
The relationship between dreams and trading is a fascinating subject. Readers may look up 
Seykota's and Tharp's comments on this matter. Th ere was another interview in which this topic 
was prominently discussed. In that instance, the tr ader decided to rescind his approval for use of 
our conversation in the book. I wa s somewhat puzzled by his de cision, since the chapter was 
basically complimentary. "What could you possibl y have found so offensive as to back out 
completely?" I asked. "Absolut ely nothing," he replied. "In f act, you made me sound almost 
human." It turned out that he was upset about his inclusion in a recently published book and that he 
was adamantly opposed to his ap pearance in any book. Even the offer of anonymity failed to 
change his decision. I did, however, manage to get his permission to use th e dream-related portion 
of the interview. (The name references in the following conversation have been changed.) 
In 1980, the year when corn set its record high, I was long the position limit. One night I had the 
following dream. I'm talking to myself and I say, "Hey Jerry, where is corn  going to?" "To $4.15." 
"Where is corn now?" "$4.07." "You mean you are taki ng all that risk for an extra eight cents? Are 
you crazy?" I woke up in a flash. I knew I had to get out of my en tire corn position as soon as the 
market opened the next day. 
The next morning, the market opened up a little hi gher, and I started selling. The market moved a 
little higher, and I sold more heavily. The market moved up some more. For a minute, I thought the 
floor broker had executed my or der backwards. He hadn't. 
Anyway, a few minutes later, I'm completely out of my position and the phone rings. It's my friend 
Carl, another good trader, who had al so been long corn. He says, "J erry, is that you doing all the 
selling?" I tell him, "Yes, I just got out of my  entire position." "What are you doing?" he shouts. I 
say, "Carl, where is corn going to?" "About $4.15-4.20," he  replies. "Where is  corn now?" I ask 
him. I hear an immediate click over the phone . He didn't even waste any time saying good-bye. 
And was that the top of the corn market? 
It might have gone up another day, but that was just about the high. Once it started falling, I could 
never have unloaded a position of my size. 
I found this trader's narration of his dream partic ularly fascinating, since I have occasionally had 
similar experiences. Usually, I have found that wh en you feel strongly en ough about a trade (either 
getting in or getting out) to dream about it, the me ssage should be heeded. Of course, like anything 
else, this does not work all the time, but I believe it places the odds more in your favor. 
As I interpret it, the dream is the means by wh ich our subconscious penetrates the barriers we 
sometimes erect in accepting the true analysis of a market. For example, if I am bullish and not in a 
market, I might rationalize that it is prudent to wa it for a reaction before en tering the trade—even if 
a realistic assessment would suggest that such a de velopment is unlikely. This is because entering 
the market at a higher price is a confirmation that, to some extent, I have al ready failed (that is, by 
not buying sooner)—a distasteful acknowledgment. In such a case, a dream that the market was 
going to run away on the upside might be the subconscious' way of breaking through mental 
impediments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  210 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  211Final Word  
There is no holy grail to trad ing success. The methodologies em ployed by the "market wizards" 
cover the entire spectrum from purely technical to purely fundame ntal—and everything in between. 
The length of time they typically ho ld a trade ranges from minutes to  years. Although the styles of 
the traders are very different, many common denominators were evident: 
1. All those interviewed had a driving desire to  become successful traders—in many cases, 
overcoming significant obstacles to reach their goal. 
2. All reflected confidence that they  could continue to win over th e long run. Almost invariably, 
they considered their own trading as the be st and safest investment for their money. 
3. Each trader had found a methodology that worked for him and remained true to that approach. It 
is significant that discipline was the word most frequently mentioned. 
4. The top traders take their trading very serious ly; most devote a substantial amount of their 
waking hours to market analysis and trading strategy. 
5. Rigid risk control is one of the key elements in the trading strategy of virtually all those 
interviewed. 
6. In a variety of ways, many of th e traders stressed the importance of having the patience to wait 
for the right trad ing opportunity to present itself. 
7. The importance of acting independent of the crowd was a frequently emphasized point. 
8. All the top traders understand that  losing is part of the game. 
9. They all love what they are doing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  212 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  213Appendix 1-Program Trading and Portfolio Insurance  
One subject that has received widespread publicity  in recent years is program trading. Perhaps 
never in the history of financial markets has there been more critic ism about a trading approach that 
was less understood. I would venture a guess that  less than one out of ten people opposed to 
program trading even know the de finition of the term. One source of confusion is  that program 
trading is used interchangeably to describe both the original activity and as  a more general term 
encompassing various computer-sup ported trading strategi es (for example, portfolio insurance). 
Program trading represents a clas sic arbitrage activity in which one market is bought against an 
equal short sale in a closely related market in order to realize small, near risk-free profits, resulting 
from short-lived distortions in the price relations hip between such markets. Program traders buy or 
sell an actual basket of stocks against an equa l dollar value position in stock index futures when 
they perceive the actual stocks to be underpriced or overpriced relative to futures. In effect, 
program trading tends to keep actual stock and stoc k index futures prices in line. Insofar as every 
program-related sale of actual stocks is offset  by a purchase at another time and most program 
trades are first initiated as long stock/short futures positions (because of the uptick requirement in 
shorting actual stocks), arguments that program trad ing is responsible for stock market declines are 
highly tenuous. Moreover, since the bulk of econom ic evidence indicates th at arbitrage between 
related markets tends to reduce volatility, the rela tionship between increased volatility and program 
trading is questionable at best. 
Portfolio insurance refers to the systematic sale of stoc k index futures as th e value of a stock 
portfolio declines in order to reduce risk ex posure. Once reduced, the net long exposure is 
increased back toward a full position as the repres entative stock index price increases. The theory 
underlying portfolio insurance presumes that mark et prices move smoothl y. When prices witness 
an abrupt, huge move, the results of the strategy may differ substantially from the theory. This 
occurred on October 19, 1987, when prices gapped be yond threshold portfolio insurance sell levels, 
triggering an avalanche of sell orders which were executed far below the theoretical levels. 
Although portfolio insurance may have accelerated the decline on October 19, it could reasonably 
be argued that the underlying forc es would have resulted in a si milar price decline over a greater 
span of days in the absence of por tfolio insurance. This is a questi on that can never be answered. (It 
is doubtful that program trading, as defined above, pl ayed much of a role in the crash of the week 
of October 19, since the severely delayed openi ngs of individual stocks, tremendous confusion 
related to prevailing price levels , and exchange restrictions rega rding the use of the automated 
order entry systems severely impeded this activity.) 
  214Appendix 2 - Options—Understanding the Basics*  
There are two basic type s of options: calls and puts. The purchase of a call option provides the 
buyer with the right—but not the obligation— to pur chase the underlying item at a specified price, 
called the strike or exercise price, at any time up to and including the expiration date. Aput option 
provides the buyer with the right—but not the oblig ation—to sell the underlyi ng item at the strike 
price at any time prior to expiration. (N ote, therefore, that buying a put is a bearish trade, while 
selling a put is a bullish trade.) The price of an option is called a premium. As an example of an 
option, an IBM April 130 call gives the purchaser  the right to buy 100 shares of IBM at $130 per 
share at any time during the life of the option. 
The buyer of a call seeks to profit from an anticipated price rise by  locking in a specified purchase 
price. The call buyer's maximum possible loss will be equal to the dollar amount of the premium 
paid for the option. This maximum loss would occur on an option held  until expiration if the strike 
price was above the prevailing market price. Fo r example, if IBM was trading at $125 when the 
130 option expired, the option would expire worthle ss. If at expiration, the price of the underlying 
market was above the strike price, the optio n would have some value and would hence be 
exercised. However, if the difference between the market price and the strike price was less than 
the premium paid for the option, the net result of th e trade would still be a loss. In order for a call 
buyer to realize a net profit, the difference between the market price and the strike price would have 
to exceed the premium paid when  the call was purchased (after ad justing for commission cost). The 
higher the market price, the greater the resulting profit. 
The buyer of a put seeks to profit from an anticipated  price decline by locking in a sales price. Like 
the call buyer, his maximum possible loss is limite d to the dollar amount of the premium paid for 
the option. In the case of a put held until expiration, the trade would show a net profit if the strike 
price exceeded the market price by an amount gr eater than the premium of the put at purchase 
(after adjusting for commission cost). 
Whereas the buyer of a call or put has limited risk and unlimited potential gain, the reverse is true 
for the seller. The option seller (often called the writer) receives the dollar value of the premium in 
return for undertaking the obligation to assume an opposite position at the strike price if an option 
is exercised. For example, if a call is exercise d, the seller must assume a short position in the 
underlying market at the strike price (since by ex ercising the call, the buyer assumes a long position 
at that price). 
The seller of a call seeks to profit from an anticip ated sideways to modes tly declining market. In 
such a situation, the premium earned by selling a call provides the most attractive trading 
opportunity. However, if the trader expected a large price decline, he would usually be better off 
going short the underlying market or buying a put—trades with open- ended profit potential. In a 
similar fashion, the seller of a put seeks to profit from an anticipat ed sideways to modestly rising 
market. 
Some novices have trouble understandi ng why a trader would not always  prefer the b uy side of the 
option (call or put, depe nding on market opinion), since such  a trade has unlimited potential and 
limited risk. Such confusion reflects the failur e to take probability into account. Although the 
option seller's theoretical risk is unlimited, the pri ce levels that have the greatest probability of 
occurrence (i.e., prices in the vi cinity of the market price when  the option trade occurs) would 
result in a net gain to the option seller. Roughly speaking, the option buyer accepts a large 
probability of a small loss in return for a small pr obability of a large gain, whereas the option seller 
accepts a small probability of a large loss in excha nge for a large probability of a small gain. In an 
efficient market, neither the cons istent option buye r nor the consistent opti on seller shoul d have any 
significant advantage over the long run. 
The option premium consists of two component s: intrinsic value plus time value. The intrinsic 
value of a call option is the amount by which the current market price is above th e strike price. (The 
intrinsic value of a put option is the amount by which the current  market price is below the strike 
price.) In effect, the intrinsic value is that part of the premium that could be realized if the option 
were exercised at the current market price. The intr insic value serves as a floor price for an option. 
Why? Because if the premium were less than the intr insic value, a trader c ould buy and exercise the  215option and immediately offset the resulting market position, thereby realizing a net gain (assuming 
that the trader covers at  least transaction costs). 
Options that have intrinsic value (i.e., calls with strike prices below the ma rket price and puts with 
strike prices above the mark et price) are said to be in-the-money. Options that have no intrinsic 
value are called out-of-the-money options. Options with a strike pric e closest to the market price are 
called at-the-money options. 
An out-of-the-money option, which by definition has an  intrinsic value equal to zero, will still have 
some value because of the possibility that the ma rket price will move beyond the strike price prior 
to the expiration date. An in-the-money option will have a value greater than the intrinsic value 
because a position in the option will be prefer red to a position in the underlying market. Why? 
Because both the option and the mark et position will gain equally in the event of a favorable price 
movement, but the option's maximum loss is limite d. The portion of the premium that exceeds the 
intrinsic value is called the time value.  
The three most important factors that influence an option's time value are: 
(I) Relationship between the strike and market price —Deeply out-of-the-money options will have 
little time value since it is unlikely that the mark et price will move to th e strike price—or beyond—
prior to expiration. Deeply in-the-money options have little time value, because these options offer 
positions very similarto the underlying market—both will gain and lose equivalent amounts for all 
but an extremely adverse price move. In other wo rds, for a deeply in-the-money option, the fact 
that risk is limited is not worth very much, because the strike price is so far from the prevailing 
market price. 
(2) Time remaining until expiration —The more time remaining until  expiration, the greater the 
value of the option. This is true because a longer life span increases the pr obability of the intrinsic 
value increasing by any specified  amount prior to expiration. 
(3) Volatility —Time value will vary directly with the estimated volatility [a measure of the degree 
of price variability] of the underlying market fo r the remaining life span of the option. This 
relationship is a result of the fact that greater vola tility raises the probability of the intrinsic value 
increasing by any specified amount prior to expirati on. In other words, the greater the volatility, the 
greater the probable pric e range of the market. 
Although volatility is an extremely important fact or in the determination of option premium values, 
it should be stressed that the future volatility of  a market is never precisely known until after the 
fact. (In contrast, the time rema ining until expiration and the re lationship between the current 
market price and the strike price can be exactly specified at any juncture .) Thus, volatility must 
always be estimated on the basis of historical volatility data. The future volatility estimate implied 
by market prices (i.e., option premiums), which may be higher or lower than the historical 
volatility, is called the implied volatility.  
*Adapted from Jack D. Schwager, A Complete Guide to the Futures Market (John Wiley & Sons, 
New York, NY, 1984). 