PDF generated using the open source mwlib toolkit. See http://code.pediapress.com/ for more information.
PDF generated at: Wed, 02 Feb 2011 16:50:34 UTCTechnical AnalysisContents
Articles
Technical analysis 1
CONCEPTS 11
Support and resistance 11
Trend line (technical analysis) 15
Breakout (technical analysis) 16
Market trend 16
Dead cat bounce 21
Elliott wave principle 22
Fibonacci retracement 29
Pivot point 31
Dow Theory 34
CHARTS 37
Candlestick chart 37
Open-high-low-close chart 39
Line chart 40
Point and figure chart 42
Kagi chart 45
PATTERNS: Chart Pattern 47
Chart pattern 47
Head and shoulders (chart pattern) 48
Cup and handle 50
Double top and double bottom 51
Triple top and triple bottom 52
Broadening top 54
Price channels 55
Wedge pattern 56
Triangle (chart pattern) 58
Flag and pennant patterns 60
The Island Reversal 63
Gap (chart pattern) 64
PATTERNS: Candlestick pattern 68Candlestick pattern 68
Doji 89
Hammer (candlestick pattern) 92
Hanging man (candlestick pattern) 93
Inverted hammer 94
Shooting star (candlestick pattern) 94
Marubozu 95
Spinning top (candlestick pattern) 96
Three white soldiers 97
Three Black Crows 98
Morning star (candlestick pattern) 99
Hikkake Pattern 100
INDICATORS: Trend 102
Average Directional Index 102
Ichimoku Kinkō Hyō 103
MACD 104
Mass index 108
Moving average 109
Parabolic SAR 115
Trix (technical analysis) 116
Vortex Indicator 118
Know Sure Thing (KST) Oscillator 121
INDICATORS: Momentum 124
Momentum (finance) 124
Relative Strength Index 125
Stochastic oscillator 128
Williams %R 131
INDICATORS: Volume 132
Volume (finance) 132
Accumulation/distribution index 133
Money Flow Index 134
On-balance volume 135
Volume Price Trend 136
Force Index 137
Negative volume index 137Ease of movement 140
INDICATORS: Volatility 141
Volatility (finance) 141
Average True Range 144
Bollinger Bands 145
Donchian channel 149
Standard deviation 149
INDICATORS: Other 162
Advance decline line 162
Commodity Channel Index 163
Coppock curve 165
Keltner channel 166
McClellan Oscillator 167
Ulcer Index 168
Ultimate Oscillator 170
References
Article Sources and Contributors 172
Image Sources, Licenses and Contributors 176
Article Licenses
License 179Technical analysis 1
Technical analysis
In finance, technical analysis is a security analysis discipline for forecasting the direction of prices through the
study of past market data, primarily price and volume.[1] Behavioral economics and quantitative analysis incorporate
substantial aspects of technical analysis,[2] which being an aspect of active management stands in contradiction to
much of modern portfolio theory. According to the weak-form efficient-market hypothesis, such forecasting methods
are valueless, since prices follow a random walk or are otherwise essentially unpredictable.
History
The principles of technical analysis derive from the observation of financial markets over hundreds of years.[3] The
oldest known hints of technical analysis appear in Joseph de la Vega's accounts of the Dutch markets in the 17th
century. In Asia, the oldest example of technical analysis is thought to be a method developed by Homma Munehisa
during early 18th century which evolved into the use of candlestick techniques, and is today a main charting tool.[4]
[5] In the 1920s and 1930s Richard W. Schabacker published several books which continued the work of Dow and
William Peter Hamilton in his books Stock Market Theory and Practice and Technical Market Analysis. At the end
of his life he was joined by his brother in law, Robert D. Edwards who finished his last book. In 1948 Edwards and
John Magee published Technical Analysis of Stock Trends which is widely considered to be one of the seminal
works of the discipline. It is exclusively concerned with trend analysis and chart patterns and remains in use to the
present. It is now in its 9th edition. As is obvious, early technical analysis was almost exclusively the analysis of
charts, because the processing power of computers was not available for statistical analysis. Charles Dow reportedly
originated a form of chart analysis used by technicians—point and figure analysis.
Dow Theory is based on the collected writings of Dow Jones co-founder and editor Charles Dow, and inspired the
use and development of modern technical analysis from the end of the 19th century. Other pioneers of analysis
techniques include Ralph Nelson Elliott, William Delbert Gann and Richard Wyckoff who developed their
respective techniques in the early 20th century.
Many more technical tools and theories have been developed and enhanced in recent decades, with an increasing
emphasis on computer-assisted techniques.
General description
While fundamental analysts examine earnings, dividends, new products, research and the like, technical analysts
examine what investors fear or think about those developments and whether or not investors have the wherewithal to
back up their opinions; these two concepts are called psych (psychology) and supply/demand. Technicians employ
many techniques, one of which is the use of charts. Using charts, technical analysts seek to identify price patterns
and market trends in financial markets and attempt to exploit those patterns.[6] Technicians use various methods and
tools, the study of price charts is but one.
Supply/demand indicators monitor investors' liquidity; margin levels, short interest, cash in brokerage accounts, etc.,
in an attempt to determine whether they have any money left. Other indicators monitor the state of psych - are
investors bullish or bearish? - and are they willing to spend money to back up their beliefs. A spent-out bull cannot
move the market higher, and a well heeled bear won't!; investors need to know which they are facing. In the end,
stock prices are only what investors think; therefore determining what they think is every bit as critical as an
earnings estimate.
Technicians using charts search for archetypal price chart patterns, such as the well-known head and shoulders or
double top/bottom reversal patterns, study technical indicators, moving averages, and look for forms such as lines of
support, resistance, channels, and more obscure formations such as flags, pennants, balance days and cup and handle
patterns.Technical analysis 2
Technical analysts also widely use market indicators of many sorts, some of which are mathematical transformations
of price, often including up and down volume, advance/decline data and other inputs. These indicators are used to
help access whether an asset is trending, and if it is, its probability of its direction and of continuation. Technicians
also look for relationships between price/volume indices and market indicators. Examples include the relative
strength index, and MACD. Other avenues of study include correlations between changes in options (implied
volatility) and put/call ratios with price. Also important are sentiment indicators such as Put/Call ratios, bull/bear
ratios, short interest and Implied Volatility, etc.
There are many techniques in technical analysis. Adherents of different techniques (for example, candlestick
charting, Dow Theory, and Elliott wave theory) may ignore the other approaches, yet many traders combine
elements from more than one technique. Some technical analysts use subjective judgment to decide which pattern(s)
a particular instrument reflects at a given time, and what the interpretation of that pattern should be. Others employ a
strictly mechanical or systematic approach to pattern identification and interpretation.
Technical analysis is frequently contrasted with fundamental analysis, the study of economic factors that influence
the way investors price financial markets. Technical analysis holds that prices already reflect all such trends before
investors are aware of them. Uncovering those trends is what technical indicators are designed to do, imperfect as
they may be. Fundamental indicators are subject to the same limitations, naturally. Some traders use technical or
fundamental analysis exclusively, while others use both types to make trading decisions which conceivably is the
most rational approach.
Users of technical analysis are often called technicians or market technicians. Some prefer the term technical market
analyst or simply market analyst. An older term, chartist, is sometimes used, but as the discipline has expanded and
modernized, the use of the term chartist has become less popular, as it is only one aspect of technical analysis.
Characteristics
Technical analysis employs models and trading rules based on price and volume transformations, such as the relative
strength index, moving averages, regressions, inter-market and intra-market price correlations, cycles or, classically,
through recognition of chart patterns.
Technical analysis stands in contrast to the fundamental analysis approach to security and stock analysis. Technical
analysis analyses price, volume and other market information, whereas fundamental analysis looks at the actual facts
of the company, market, currency or commodity. Most large brokerage, trading group, or financial institution will
typically have both a technical analysis and fundamental analysis team.
Technical analysis is widely used among traders and financial professionals, and is very often used by active day
traders, market makers, and pit traders. In the 1960s and 1970s it was widely dismissed by academics. In a recent
review, Irwin and Park[7] reported that 56 of 95 modern studies found it produces positive results, but noted that
many of the positive results were rendered dubious by issues such as data snooping so that the evidence in support of
technical analysis was inconclusive; it is still considered by many academics to be pseudoscience.[8] Academics such
as Eugene Fama say the evidence for technical analysis is sparse and is inconsistent with the weak form of the
efficient-market hypothesis.[9] [10] Users hold that even if technical analysis cannot predict the future, it helps to
identify trading opportunities.[11]
In the foreign exchange markets, its use may be more widespread than fundamental analysis.[12] [13] This does not
mean technical analysis is more applicable to foreign markets, but that technical analysis is more recognized there as
to its efficacy there than elsewhere. While some isolated studies have indicated that technical trading rules might
lead to consistent returns in the period prior to 1987,[14] [15] [16] [17] most academic work has focused on the nature of
the anomalous position of the foreign exchange market.[18] It is speculated that this anomaly is due to central bank
intervention, which obviously technical analysis is not designed to predict.[19] Recent research suggests that
combining various trading signals into a Combined Signal Approach may be able to increase profitability and reduce
dependence on any single rule.[20]Technical analysis 3
Principles
Stock chart showing levels of support (4,5,6, 7,
and 8) and resistance (1, 2, and 3); levels of
resistance tend to become levels of support and
vice versa.
Technicians say that a market's price reflects all relevant information,
so their analysis looks at the history of a security's trading pattern
rather than external drivers such as economic, fundamental and news
events. Price action also tends to repeat itself because investors
collectively tend toward patterned behavior – hence technicians' focus
on identifiable trends and conditions.
Market action discounts everything
Based on the premise that all relevant information is already reflected
by prices, technical analysts believe it is important to understand what
investors think of that information, known and perceived; studies such as by Cutler, Poterba, and Summers titled
"What Moves Stock Prices?" do not cover this aspect of investing.
Prices move in trends
Technical analysts believe that prices trend directionally, i.e., up, down, or sideways (flat) or some combination. The
basic definition of a price trend was originally put forward by Dow Theory.[6]
An example of a security that had an apparent trend is AOL from November 2001 through August 2002. A technical
analyst or trend follower recognizing this trend would look for opportunities to sell this security. AOL consistently
moves downward in price. Each time the stock rose, sellers would enter the market and sell the stock; hence the
"zig-zag" movement in the price. The series of "lower highs" and "lower lows" is a tell tale sign of a stock in a down
trend.[21] In other words, each time the stock moved lower, it fell below its previous relative low price. Each time the
stock moved higher, it could not reach the level of its previous relative high price.
Note that the sequence of lower lows and lower highs did not begin until August. Then AOL makes a low price that
doesn't pierce the relative low set earlier in the month. Later in the same month, the stock makes a relative high equal
to the most recent relative high. In this a technician sees strong indications that the down trend is at least pausing and
possibly ending, and would likely stop actively selling the stock at that point.
History tends to repeat itself
Technical analysts believe that investors collectively repeat the behavior of the investors that preceded them.
"Everyone wants in on the next Microsoft," "If this stock ever gets to $50 again, I will buy it," "This company's
technology will revolutionize its industry, therefore this stock will skyrocket" – these are all examples of investor
sentiment repeating itself. To a technician, the emotions in the market may be irrational, but they exist. Because
investor behavior repeats itself so often, technicians believe that recognizable (and predictable) price patterns will
develop on a chart.[6]
Technical analysis is not limited to charting, but it always considers price trends. For example, many technicians
monitor surveys of investor sentiment. These surveys gauge the attitude of market participants, specifically whether
they are bearish or bullish. Technicians use these surveys to help determine whether a trend will continue or if a
reversal could develop; they are most likely to anticipate a change when the surveys report extreme investor
sentiment. Surveys that show overwhelming bullishness, for example, are evidence that an uptrend may reverse – the
premise being that if most investors are bullish they have already bought the market (anticipating higher prices). And
because most investors are bullish and invested, one assumes that few buyers remain. This leaves more potential
sellers than buyers, despite the bullish sentiment. This suggests that prices will trend down, and is an example of
contrarian trading.Technical analysis 4
Industry
The industry is globally represented by the International Federation of Technical Analysts (IFTA), which is a
Federation of regional and national organizations and the Market Technicians Association (MTA). In the United
States, the industry is represented by both the Market Technicians Association (MTA) and the American Association
of Professional Technical Analysts (AAPTA). The United States is also represented by the Technical Security
Analysts Association of San Francisco (TSAASF). In the United Kingdom, the industry is represented by the Society
of Technical Analysts (STA). In Canada the industry is represented by the Canadian Society of Technical Analysts.
Some other national professional technical analysis organizations are noted in the external links section below.
Professional technical analysis societies have worked on creating a body of knowledge that describes the field of
Technical Analysis. A body of knowledge is central to the field as a way of defining how and why technical analysis
may work. It can then be used by academia, as well as regulatory bodies, in developing proper research and
standards for the field. The Market Technicians Association (MTA) has published a body of knowledge, which is the
structure for the MTA's Chartered Market Technician (CMT) exam.
Use
Traders generally share the view that trading in the direction of the trend is the most effective means to be profitable
in financial or commodities markets. John W. Henry, Larry Hite, Ed Seykota, Richard Dennis, William Eckhardt,
Victor Sperandeo, Michael Marcus and Paul Tudor Jones (some of the so-called wizards in the popular book, Market
Wizards by Jack D. Schwager) have each amassed massive fortunes via the use of technical analysis and its
concepts. George Lane, a technical analyst, coined one of the most popular phrases on Wall Street, "The trend is
your friend!"
Many non-arbitrage algorithmic trading systems rely on the idea of trend-following, as do many hedge funds. A
relatively recent trend, both in research and industrial practice, has been the development of increasingly
sophisticated automated trading strategies. These often rely on underlying technical analysis principles (see
algorithmic trading article for an overview).
Systematic trading
Neural networks
Since the early 1990s when the first practically usable types emerged, artificial neural networks (ANNs) have rapidly
grown in popularity. They are artificial intelligence adaptive software systems that have been inspired by how
biological neural networks work. They are used because they can learn to detect complex patterns in data. In
mathematical terms, they are universal function approximators,[22] [23] meaning that given the right data and
configured correctly, they can capture and model any input-output relationships. This not only removes the need for
human interpretation of charts or the series of rules for generating entry/exit signals, but also provides a bridge to
fundamental analysis, as the variables used in fundamental analysis can be used as input.
As ANNs are essentially non-linear statistical models, their accuracy and prediction capabilities can be both
mathematically and empirically tested. In various studies, authors have claimed that neural networks used for
generating trading signals given various technical and fundamental inputs have significantly outperformed buy-hold
strategies as well as traditional linear technical analysis methods when combined with rule-based expert systems.[24]
[25] [26]
While the advanced mathematical nature of such adaptive systems has kept neural networks for financial analysis
mostly within academic research circles, in recent years more user friendly neural network software has made the
technology more accessible to traders. However, large-scale application is problematic because of the problem of
matching the correct neural topology to the market being studied.Technical analysis 5
Rule-based trading
Rule-based trading is an approach intended to create trading plans using strict and clear-cut rules. Unlike some other
technical methods and the approach of fundamental analysis, it defines a set of rules that determine all trades,
leaving minimal discretion. The theory behind this approach is that by following a distinct set of trading rules you
will reduce the number of poor decisions, which are often emotion based.
For instance, a trader might make a set of rules stating that he will take a long position whenever the price of a
particular instrument closes above its 50-day moving average, and shorting it whenever it drops below.
Combination with other market forecast methods
John Murphy states that the principal sources of information available to technicians are price, volume and open
interest.[27] Other data, such as indicators and sentiment analysis, are considered secondary.
However, many technical analysts reach outside pure technical analysis, combining other market forecast methods
with their technical work. One advocate for this approach is John Bollinger, who coined the term rational analysis in
the middle 1980s for the intersection of technical analysis and fundamental analysis.[28] Another such approach,
fusion analysis,[29] overlays fundamental analysis with technical, in an attempt to improve portfolio manager
performance.
Technical analysis is also often combined with quantitative analysis and economics. For example, neural networks
may be used to help identify intermarket relationships.[30] A few market forecasters combine financial astrology with
technical analysis. Chris Carolan's article "Autumn Panics and Calendar Phenomenon", which won the Market
Technicians Association Dow Award for best technical analysis paper in 1998, demonstrates how technical analysis
and lunar cycles can be combined.[31] Calendar phenomena, such as the January effect in the stock market, are
generally believed to be caused by tax and accounting related transactions, and are not related to the subject of
financial astrology.
Investor and newsletter polls, and magazine cover sentiment indicators, are also used by technical analysts.[32]
Empirical evidence
Whether technical analysis actually works is a matter of controversy. Methods vary greatly, and different technical
analysts can sometimes make contradictory predictions from the same data. Many investors claim that they
experience positive returns, but academic appraisals often find that it has little predictive power.[33] Modern studies
may be more positive: of 95 modern studies, 56 concluded that technical analysis had positive results, although
data-snooping bias and other problems make the analysis difficult.[7] Nonlinear prediction using neural networks
occasionally produces statistically significant prediction results.[34] A Federal Reserve working paper[15] regarding
support and resistance levels in short-term foreign exchange rates "offers strong evidence that the levels help to
predict intraday trend interruptions," although the "predictive power" of those levels was "found to vary across the
exchange rates and firms examined".
Technical trading strategies were found to be effective in the Chinese marketplace by a recent study that states,
"Finally, we find significant positive returns on buy trades generated by the contrarian version of the moving average
crossover rule, the channel breakout rule, and the Bollinger band trading rule, after accounting for transaction costs
of 0.50 percent."[35]
An influential 1992 study by Brock et al. which appeared to find support for technical trading rules was tested for
data snooping and other problems in 1999;[36] the sample covered by Brock et al. was robust to data snooping.
Subsequently, a comprehensive study of the question by Amsterdam economist Gerwin Griffioen concludes that: 
"for the U.S., Japanese and most Western European stock market indices the recursive out-of-sample forecasting 
procedure does not show to be profitable, after implementing little transaction costs. Moreover, for sufficiently highTechnical analysis 6
transaction costs it is found, by estimating CAPMs, that technical trading shows no statistically significant
risk-corrected out-of-sample forecasting power for almost all of the stock market indices."[10] Transaction costs are
particularly applicable to "momentum strategies"; a comprehensive 1996 review of the data and studies concluded
that even small transaction costs would lead to an inability to capture any excess from such strategies.[37]
In a paper published in the Journal of Finance, Dr. Andrew W. Lo, director MIT Laboratory for Financial
Engineering, working with Harry Mamaysky and Jiang Wang found that "Technical analysis, also known as
"charting," has been a part of financial practice for many decades, but this discipline has not received the same level
of academic scrutiny and acceptance as more traditional approaches such as fundamental analysis. One of the main
obstacles is the highly subjective nature of technical analysis—the presence of geometric shapes in historical price
charts is often in the eyes of the beholder. In this paper, we propose a systematic and automatic approach to technical
pattern recognition using nonparametric kernel regression, and apply this method to a large number of U.S. stocks
from 1962 to 1996 to evaluate the effectiveness of technical analysis. By comparing the unconditional empirical
distribution of daily stock returns to the conditional distribution—conditioned on specific technical indicators such
as head-and-shoulders or double-bottoms—we find that over the 31-year sample period, several technical indicators
do provide incremental information and may have some practical value."[38] In that same paper Dr. Lo wrote that
"several academic studies suggest that ... technical analysis may well be an effective means for extracting useful
information from market prices."[39] Some techniques such as Drummond Geometry attempt to overcome the past
data bias by projecting support and resistance levels from differing time frames into the near-term future and
combining that with reversion to the mean techniques.[40]
Efficient market hypothesis
The efficient-market hypothesis (EMH) contradicts the basic tenets of technical analysis by stating that past prices
cannot be used to profitably predict future prices. Thus it holds that technical analysis cannot be effective. Economist
Eugene Fama published the seminal paper on the EMH in the Journal of Finance in 1970, and said "In short, the
evidence in support of the efficient markets model is extensive, and (somewhat uniquely in economics) contradictory
evidence is sparse."[41] EMH advocates say that if prices quickly reflect all relevant information, no method
(including technical analysis) can "beat the market." Developments which influence prices occur randomly and are
unknowable in advance.
Technicians say that EMH ignores the way markets work, in that many investors base their expectations on past
earnings or track record, for example. Because future stock prices can be strongly influenced by investor
expectations, technicians claim it only follows that past prices influence future prices.[42] They also point to research
in the field of behavioral finance, specifically that people are not the rational participants EMH makes them out to
be. Technicians have long said that irrational human behavior influences stock prices, and that this behavior leads to
predictable outcomes.[43] Author David Aronson says that the theory of behavioral finance blends with the practice
of technical analysis:
By considering the impact of emotions, cognitive errors, irrational preferences, and the dynamics of
group behavior, behavioral finance offers succinct explanations of excess market volatility as well as the
excess returns earned by stale information strategies.... cognitive errors may also explain the existence
of market inefficiencies that spawn the systematic price movements that allow objective TA [technical
analysis] methods to work.[42]
EMH advocates reply that while individual market participants do not always act rationally (or have complete
information), their aggregate decisions balance each other, resulting in a rational outcome (optimists who buy stock
and bid the price higher are countered by pessimists who sell their stock, which keeps the price in equilibrium).[44]
Likewise, complete information is reflected in the price because all market participants bring their own individual,
but incomplete, knowledge together in the market.[44]Technical analysis 7
Random walk hypothesis
The random walk hypothesis may be derived from the weak-form efficient markets hypothesis, which is based on the
assumption that market participants take full account of any information contained in past price movements (but not
necessarily other public information). In his book A Random Walk Down Wall Street, Princeton economist Burton
Malkiel said that technical forecasting tools such as pattern analysis must ultimately be self-defeating: "The problem
is that once such a regularity is known to market participants, people will act in such a way that prevents it from
happening in the future."[45]
In the late 1980s, professors Andrew Lo and Craig McKinlay published a paper which casts doubt on the random
walk hypothesis. In a 1999 response to Malkiel, Lo and McKinlay collected empirical papers that questioned the
hypothesis' applicability[46] that suggested a non-random and possibly predictive component to stock price
movement, though they were careful to point out that rejecting random walk does not necessarily invalidate EMH, an
entirely separate concept from RWH.
Technicians say that the EMH and random walk theories both ignore the realities of markets, in that participants are
not completely rational and that current price moves are not independent of previous moves.[21] [47]
Charting terms and indicators
Concepts
•Resistance — a price level that may prompt a net increase of selling activity
•Support — a price level that may prompt a net increase of buying activity
•Breakout — the concept whereby prices forcefully penetrate an area of prior support or resistance, usually, but
not always, accompanied by an increase in volume.
•Trending — the phenomenon by which price movement tends to persist in one direction for an extended period of
time
•Average true range — averaged daily trading range, adjusted for price gaps
•Chart pattern — distinctive pattern created by the movement of security prices on a chart
•Dead cat bounce — the phenomenon whereby a spectacular decline in the price of a stock is immediately
followed by a moderate and temporary rise before resuming its downward movement
•Elliott wave principle and the golden ratio to calculate successive price movements and retracements
•Fibonacci ratios — used as a guide to determine support and resistance
•Momentum — the rate of price change
•Point and figure analysis — A priced-based analytical approach employing numerical filters which may
incorporate time references, though ignores time entirely in its construction.
•Cycles - time targets for potential change in price action (price only moves up, down, or sideways)
Types of charts
•Open-high-low-close chart — OHLC charts, also known as bar charts, plot the span between the high and low
prices of a trading period as a vertical line segment at the trading time, and the open and close prices with
horizontal tick marks on the range line, usually a tick to the left for the open price and a tick to the right for the
closing price.
•Candlestick chart — Of Japanese origin and similar to OHLC, candlesticks widen and fill the interval between the
open and close prices to emphasize the open/close relationship. In the West, often black or red candle bodies
represent a close lower than the open, while white, green or blue candles represent a close higher than the open
price.
•Line chart — Connects the closing price values with line segments.Technical analysis 8
•Point and figure chart — a chart type employing numerical filters with only passing references to time, and which
ignores time entirely in its construction.
Overlays
Overlays are generally superimposed over the main price chart.
•Resistance — a price level that may act as a ceiling above price
•Support — a price level that may act as a floor below price
•Trend line — a sloping line described by at least two peaks or two troughs
•Channel — a pair of parallel trend lines
•Moving average — the last n-bars of price divided by "n" -- where "n" is the number of bars specified by the
length of the average. A moving average can be thought of as a kind of dynamic trend-line.
•Bollinger bands — a range of price volatility
•Parabolic SAR — Wilder's trailing stop based on prices tending to stay within a parabolic curve during a strong
trend
•Pivot point — derived by calculating the numerical average of a particular currency's or stock's high, low and
closing prices
•Ichimoku kinko hyo — a moving average-based system that factors in time and the average point between a
candle's high and low
Price-based indicators
These indicators are generally shown below or above the main price chart.
•Advance decline line — a popular indicator of market breadth
•Average Directional Index — a widely used indicator of trend strength
•Commodity Channel Index — identifies cyclical trends
•MACD — moving average convergence/divergence
•Relative Strength Index (RSI) — oscillator showing price strength
•Stochastic oscillator — close position within recent trading range
•Trix — an oscillator showing the slope of a triple-smoothed exponential moving average
•Momentum — the rate of price change
Volume-based indicators
•Accumulation/distribution index — based on the close within the day's range
•Money Flow — the amount of stock traded on days the price went up
•On-balance volume — the momentum of buying and selling stocks
Notes
[1]See e.g. Kirkpatrick and Dahlquist Technical Analysis: The Complete Resource for Financial Market Technicians (Financial Times Press,
2006), page 3.
[2]Lo, Andrew W.; Hasanhodzic, Jasmina. The Evolution of Technical Analysis: Financial Prediction from Babylonian Tablets to Bloomberg
Terminals. Bloomberg Press, 2010. ISBN 1576603490
[3]Joseph de la Vega, Confusión de Confusiones, 1688
[4]Nison, Steve (1991). Japanese Candlestick Charting Techniques. pp. 15–18. ISBN 0139316507.
[5]Nison, Steve (1994). Beyond Candlesticks: New Japanese Charting Techniques Revealed, John Wiley and Sons, p. 14. ISBN 0-471-00720-X
[6]John J. Murphy, Technical Analysis of the Financial Markets (New York Institute of Finance, 1999), pages 1-5,24-31.
[7]Irwin, Scott H. and Park, Cheol-Ho. (2007). "What Do We Know About the Profitability of Technical Analysis?" Journal of Economic
Surveys, Vol. 21, No. 4, pp. 786-826. Available at SSRN (http:/ / ssrn. com/ abstract=1006275). DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-6419.2007.00519.x.
[8]Paulos, J.A. (2003). A Mathematician Plays the Stock Market. Basic Books.Technical analysis 9
[9]Fama, Eugene (May 1970). "Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical Work," (http:/ / www. e-m-h. org/ Fama70. pdf)
The Journal of Finance, v. 25 (2), pp. 383-417.
[10] Griffioen, Technical Analysis in Financial Markets (http:/ / papers. ssrn. com/ sol3/ papers. cfm?abstract_id=566882)
[11] "Getting Started in Technical Analysis" 1999 Jack D. Schwager Page 2
[12] Taylor, Mark P.; Allen, Helen (1992). "The Use of Technical Analysis in the Foreign Exchange Market". Journal of International Money
and Finance 11 (3): 304–314. doi:10.1016/0261-5606(92)90048-3.
[13] Cross, Sam Y. (1998). All About the Foreign Exchange Market in the United States (http:/ / www. newyorkfed. org/ education/ addpub/
usfxm/ ), Federal Reserve Bank of New York chapter 11, pp. 113-115.
[14] Brock, William; Lakonishok, Josef; Lebaron, Blake (1992). "Simple Technical Trading Rules and the Stochastic Properties of Stock
Returns" (http:/ / jstor. org/ stable/ 2328994). The Journal of Finance 47 (5): 1731–1764. doi:10.2307/2328994. .
[15] Osler, Karen (July 2000). "Support for Resistance: Technical Analysis and Intraday Exchange Rates," FRBNY Economic Policy Review (
abstract and paper here (http:/ / www. ny. frb. org/ research/ epr/ 00v06n2/ 0007osle. html)).
[16] Neely, Christopher J., and Paul A. Weller (2001). "Technical analysis and Central Bank Intervention," Journal of International Money and
Finance, 20 (7), 949–70 ( abstract and paper here (http:/ / research. stlouisfed. org/ wp/ more/ 1997-002/ ))
[17] Taylor, M.P.; Allen, H. (1992). "The use of technical analysis in the foreign exchange market" (http:/ / ideas. repec. org/ a/ eee/ jimfin/
v11y1992i3p304-314. html). Journal of International Money and Finance 11 (3): 304–314. doi:10.1016/0261-5606(92)90048-3. . Retrieved
2008-03-29.
[18] Frankel, J.A.; Froot, K.A. (1990). "Chartists, Fundamentalists, and Trading in the Foreign Exchange Market" (http:/ / links. jstor. org/
sici?sici=0002-8282(199005)80:2<181:CFATIT>2. 0. CO;2-F). The American Economic Review 80 (2): 181–185. . Retrieved 2008-03-29.
[19] Neely, C.J (1998). "Technical Analysis and the Profitability of US Foreign Exchange Intervention" (http:/ / ideas. repec. org/ a/ fip/ fedlrv/
y1998ijulp3-17nv. 80no. 4. html). Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 80 (4): 3–17. . Retrieved 2008-03-29.
[20] Lento, Camillo (2008). "A Combined Signal Approach to Technical Analysis on the S&P 500". Journal of Business & Economics Research
6 (8): 41–51.
[21] Kahn, Michael N. (2006). Technical Analysis Plain and Simple: Charting the Markets in Your Language, Financial Times Press, Upper
Saddle River, New Jersey, p. 80. ISBN 0-13-134597-4.
[22] K. Funahashi, On the approximate realization of continuous mappings by neural networks, Neural Networks vol 2, 1989
[23] K. Hornik, Multilayer feed-forward networks are universal approximators, Neural Networks, vol 2, 1989
[24] R. Lawrence. Using Neural Networks to Forecast Stock Market Prices (http:/ / people. ok. ubc. ca/ rlawrenc/ research/ Papers/ nn. pdf)
[25] B.Egeli et al. Stock Market Prediction Using Artificial Neural Networks (http:/ / www. hicbusiness. org/ biz2003proceedings/ Birgul Egeli.
pdf)
[26] M. Zekić. Neural Network Applications in Stock Market Predictions - A Methodology Analysis (http:/ / www. efos. hr/ nastavnici/ mzekic/
radovi/ mzekic_varazdin98. pdf)
[27] John J. Murphy, Technical Analysis of the Financial Markets (New York Institute of Finance, 1999).
[28] http:/ / www. researchandmarkets. com/ reports/ 450723/ the_capital_growth_letter. htm
[29] http:/ / www. nyif. com/ courses/ tech_3002. html
[30] http:/ / www. iijournals. com/ JOT/ default. asp?Page=2& ISS=22278& SID=644085
[31] https:/ / www. mta. org/ eweb/ docs/ 1998DowAward. pdf
[32] http:/ / www. sfomag. com/ departmentprintdetail. asp?ID=1776333475
[33] Browning, E.S. (July 31, 2007). "Reading market tea leaves". The Wall Street Journal Europe (Dow Jones): pp. 17–18.
[34] Skabar, Cloete, Networks, Financial Trading and the Efficient Markets Hypothesis (http:/ / crpit. com/ confpapers/ CRPITV4Skabar. pdf)
[35] Nauzer J. Balsara, Gary Chen and Lin Zheng "The Chinese Stock Market: An Examination of the Random Walk Model and Technical
Trading Rules" (http:/ / findarticles. com/ p/ articles/ mi_qa5466/ is_200704/ ai_n21292807/ pg_1?tag=artBody;col1) The Quarterly Journal
of Business and Economics, Spring 2007
[36] Sullivan, R.; Timmermann, A.; White, H. (1999). "Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap". The Journal of
Finance 54 (5): 1647–1691. doi:10.1111/0022-1082.00163.
[37] Chan, L.K.C.; Jegadeesh, N.; Lakonishok, J. (1996). "Momentum Strategies" (http:/ / links. jstor. org/
sici?sici=0022-1082(199612)51:5<1681:MS>2. 0. CO;2-D). The Journal of Finance (The Journal of Finance, Vol. 51, No. 5) 51 (5):
1681–1713. doi:10.2307/2329534. . Retrieved 2008-03-29.
[38] Foundations of Technical Analysis: Computational Algorithms, Statistical Inference, and Empirical Implementation, with Harry Mamaysky
and Jiang Wang, Journal of Finance 55(2000), 1705-1765.
[39] Lo, Andrew W.; Mamaysky, Harry; Wang, Jiang (2000). "Foundations of Technical Analysis: Computational Algorithms, Statistical
Inference, and Empirical Implementation" (http:/ / www. nber. org/ papers/ w7613). Journal of Finance 55: 1705–1765.
doi:10.1111/0022-1082.00265. .
[40] David Keller, "Breakthroughs in Technical Analysis; New Thinking from the World's Top Minds," New York, Bloomberg Press, 2007,
ISBN 978-1-57660-242-3 pp.1-19
[41] Eugene Fama, "Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical Work," (http:/ / www. e-m-h. org/ Fama70. pdf) The Journal
of Finance, volume 25, issue 2 (May 1970), pp. 383-417.
[42] Aronson, David R. (2006). Evidence-Based Technical Analysis (http:/ / www. wiley. com/ WileyCDA/ WileyTitle/ 
productCd-0470008741,descCd-authorInfo. html), Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley and Sons, pages 357, 355-356, 342. ISBNTechnical analysis 10
978-0-470-00874-4.
[43] Prechter, Robert R., Jr., and Wayne D. Parker (2007). "The Financial/Economic Dichotomy in Social Behavioral Dynamics: The
Socionomic Perspective," Journal of Behavioral Finance, vol. 8 no. 2 ( abstract here (http:/ / www. leaonline. com/ doi/ abs/ 10. 1080/
15427560701381028)), pp. 84-108.
[44] Clarke, J., T. Jandik, and Gershon Mandelker (2001). “The efficient markets hypothesis,” Expert Financial Planning: Advice from Industry
Leaders, ed. R. Arffa, 126-141. New York: Wiley & Sons.
[45] Burton Malkiel, A Random Walk Down Wall Street, W. W. Norton & Company (April 2003) p. 168.
[46] Lo, Andrew and MacKinlay, Craig, A Non-Random Walk Down Wall Street, Princeton University Press (1999)
[47] Poser, Steven W. (2003). Applying Elliott Wave Theory Profitably, John Wiley and Sons, p. 71. ISBN 0-471-42007-7.
Further reading
•Douglas, Mark. The Disciplined Trader. New York Institute of Finance, 1990. ISBN 0-13-215757-8
•Edwards, Robert D.; Magee, John; Bassetti, W.H.C. Technical Analysis of Stock Trends, 9th Edition (Hardcover).
American Management Association, 2007. ISBN 0-8493-3772-0
•Hurst, J. M. The Profit Magic of Stock Transaction Timing. Prentice-Hall, 1972, ISBN 0-13-726018-0
•Kirkpatrick, Charles D. II; Dahlquist, Julie R. Technical Analysis: The Complete Resource for Financial Market
Technicians, FT Press, 2006. ISBN 0-13-153113-1
•Lefèvre, Edwin. Reminiscences of a Stock Operator. John Wiley & Sons Inc, 1994. ISBN 0-471-05970-6
•Murphy, John J. Technical Analysis of the Financial Markets. New York Institute of Finance, 1999. ISBN
0-7352-0066-1
•Pring, Martin J. Technical Analysis Explained: The Successful Investor's Guide to Spotting Investment Trends and
Turning Points. McGraw Hill, 2002. ISBN 0-07-138193-7
•Raschke, Linda Bradford; Connors, Lawrence A. Street Smarts: High Probability Short-Term Trading Strategies.
M. Gordon Publishing Group, 1995. ISBN 0-9650461-0-9
•Schwager, Jack D. Getting Started in Technical Analysis. Wiley, 1999. ISBN 0-471-29542-6
•Wilder, J. Welles. New Concepts in Technical Trading Systems. Trend Research, 1978. ISBN 0-89459-027-8
External links
International and national organizations
•International Federation of Technical Analysts (http:/ / www. ifta. org)
•Market Technicians Association (http:/ / www. mta. org)
•New Zealand: Society of Technical Analysts of New Zealand (http:/ / www. stanz. co. nz)
•Singapore: Technical Analysts Society (Singapore) (http:/ / www. tass. org. sg)11
CONCEPTS
Support and resistance
Support and resistance is a concept in technical analysis that the movement of the price of a security will tend to
stop and reverse at certain predetermined price levels.
Support
A support level is a price level where the price tends to find support as it is going down. This means the price is
more likely to "bounce" off this level rather than break through it. However, once the price has passed this level, by
an amount exceeding some noise, it is likely to continue dropping until it finds another support level.
Resistance
A resistance level is the opposite of a support level. It is where the price tends to find resistance as it is going up.
This means the price is more likely to "bounce" off this level rather than break through it. However, once the price
has passed this level, by an amount exceeding some noise, it is likely that it will continue rising until it finds another
resistance level.
Reactive vs Proactive support and resistance
Most Traders will be aware of the many different types of Support and Resistance methods used by traders
Proactive Support and Resistance methods are ‘predictive’ they often outline areas where price has not actually been.
They are formed based upon current price action that through analysis has been shown to be predictive of future
price action. Proactive Support and Resistance methods include Elliot Wave, Fibonacci, Calculated Pivots,
Trendlines and Moving averages. VWAP, Market Profile (VAH, VAL and POC)
Reactive Support and Resistance are the opposite they are formed directly as a result of price action or volume
behaviour. They include Volume Profile, Price Swing lows/highs, Initial Balance, Open Gaps and OHLC.
Both Proactive and Reactive Support and Resistance methods have merit and form a staple part of any Support and
Resistance based trading strategy
Identifying support and resistance levels
Support and resistance levels can be identified by trend lines. Some traders believe in using pivot point calculations.
The more often a support/resistance level is "tested" (touched and bounced off by price), the more significance given
to that specific level.
If a price breaks past a support level, that support level often becomes a new resistance level. The opposite is true as
well, if price breaks a resistance level, it will often find support at that level in the future.
Various methods of determining support and resistance exist. A price histogram is useful in showing at what price a
market has spent more relative time. Psychological levels near round numbers often serve as support and resistance.
More recently, volatility has been used to calculate potential support and resistance.Support and resistance 12
Using support and resistance levels
This is an example of support switching roles with resistance, and vice versa:
If a stock price is moving between support and resistance levels, then a basic investment strategy commonly used by
traders, is to buy a stock at support and sell at resistance, then short at resistance and cover the short at support as per
the following example:Support and resistance 13
When judging entry and exit investment timing using support or resistance levels it is important to choose a chart
based on a price interval period that aligns with your trading strategy timeframe. Short term traders tend to use charts
based on interval periods, such as 1 minute (i.e. the price of the security is plotted on the chart every 1 minute), with
longer term traders using price charts based on hourly, daily, weekly or monthly interval periods. Typically traders
use shorter term interval charts when making a final decisions on when to invest, such as the following example
based on 1 week of historical data with price plotted every 15 minutes. In this example the early signs that the stock
was coming out of a downtrend was when it started to form support at $30.48 and then started to form higher highs
and higher lows signalling a change from negative to positive trending.Support and resistance 14
References
•John Murphy, Technical Analysis of the Financial Markets, ISBN 978-0735200661Trend line (technical analysis) 15
Trend line (technical analysis)
A trend line is formed when you can draw a diagonal line between two or more price pivot points. They are
commonly used to judge entry and exit investment timing when trading securities. It can also be referred to a dutch
line as it was first used in Holland
A trend line is a bounding line for the price movement of a security. A support trend line is formed when a
securities price decreases and then rebounds at a pivot point that aligns with at least two previous support pivot
points. Similarly a resistance trend line is formed when a securities price increases and then rebounds at a pivot
point that aligns with at least two previous resistance pivot points. The following chart provides an example of
support and resistance trend lines:
Trend lines are a simple and widely used
technical analysis approach to judging entry
and exit investment timing. To establish a
trend line historical data, typically presented
in the format of a chart such as the above
price chart, is required. Historically, trend
lines have been drawn by hand on paper
charts, but it is now more common to use
charting software that enables trend lines to
be drawn on computer based charts. There
are some charting software that will
automatically generate trend lines, however
most traders prefer to draw their own trend
lines.
When establishing trend lines it is important
to choose a chart based on a price interval
period that aligns with your trading strategy. Short term traders tend to use charts based on interval periods, such as 1
minute (i.e. the price of the security is plotted on the chart every 1 minute), with longer term traders using price
charts based on hourly, daily, weekly and monthly interval periods.
However, time periods can also be viewed in terms of years. For example, below is a chart of the S&P 500 since the
earliest data point until April 2008. Please note that while the Oracle example above uses a linear scale of price
changes, long term data is more often viewed as logarithmic: e.g. the changes are really an attempt to approximate
percentage changes than pure numerical value. If we were to view this same chart linearly, we would not be able to
see any detail from 1950 to about 1990 simply because all the data would be compressed to the bottom.
Trend lines are typically used with
price charts, however they can also be
used with a range of technical analysis
charts such as MACD and RSI. Trend
lines can be used to identify positive
and negative trending charts, whereby
a positive trending chart forms an
upsloping line when the support and the resistance pivots points are aligned, and a negative trending chart forms a
downsloping line when the support and resistance pivot points are aligned.
Trend lines are used in many ways by traders. If a stock price is moving between support and resistance trend lines,
then a basic investment strategy commonly used by traders, is to buy a stock at support and sell at resistance, thenTrend line (technical analysis) 16
short at resistance and cover the short at support. The logic behind this, is that when the price returns to an existing
principal trend line it may be an opportunity to open new positions in the direction of the trend, in the belief that the
trend line will hold and the trend will continue further. A second way is that when price action breaks through the
principal trend line of an existing trend, it is evidence that the trend may be going to fail, and a trader may consider
trading in the opposite direction to the existing trend, or exiting positions in the direction of the trend.
External links
•Identifying and Trading Trend Lines [1]
References
[1]http:/ / www. chartsecret. com/ content/ identifying-and-trading-trend-lines
Breakout (technical analysis)
A breakout is when prices pass through and stay through an area of support or resistance. On the technical analysis
chart a break out occurs when price of a stock or commodity exits an area pattern.
Market trend
Statues of the two symbolic beasts of finance, the bear and the bull,
in front of the Frankfurt Stock Exchange.
A market trend is a putative tendency of a financial
market to move in a particular direction over time.[1]
These trends are classified as secular for long time
frames, primary for medium time frames, and
secondary lasting short times.[2] Traders identify
market trends using technical analysis, a framework
which characterizes market trends as a predictable price
response of the market at levels of price support and
price resistance, varying over time.
The terms bull market and bear market describe upward
and downward market trends, respectively, and can be
used to describe either the market as a whole or specific
sectors and securities.[3]
Secular market trend
A secular market trend is a long-term trend that lasts 5 to 25 years and consists of a series of sequential primary
trends. A secular bear market consists of smaller bull markets and larger bear markets; a secular bull market consists
of larger bull markets and smaller bear markets.
In a secular bull market the prevailing trend is "bullish" or upward moving. The United States stock market was
described as being in a secular bull market from about 1983 to 2000 (or 2007), with brief upsets including the crash
of 1987 and the dot-com bust of 2000–2002.
In a secular bear market, the prevailing trend is "bearish" or downward moving. An example of a secular bear market 
was seen in gold during the period between January 1980 to June 1999, culminating with the Brown Bottom. During 
this period the nominal gold price fell from a high of $850/oz ($30/g) to a low of $253/oz ($9/g),[4] and became partMarket trend 17
of the Great Commodities Depression.
Secondary market trend
Secondary trends are short-term changes in price direction within a primary trend. The duration is a few weeks or a
few months.
One type of secondary market trend is called a market correction. A correction is a short term price decline of 5% to
20% or so.[5] A correction is a downward movement that is not large enough to be a bear market (ex post).
Another type of secondary trend is called a bear market rally (or "sucker's rally") which consist of a market price
increase of 10% to 20%. A bear market rally is an upward movement that is not large enough to be a bull market (ex
post). Bear market rallies occurred in the Dow Jones index after the 1929 stock market crash leading down to the
market bottom in 1932, and throughout the late 1960s and early 1970s. The Japanese Nikkei 225 has been typified
by a number of bear market rallies since the late 1980s while experiencing an overall long-term downward trend.
Primary market trend
A primary trend has broad support throughout the entire market (most sectors) and lasts for a year or more.
Bull market
A bull market is associated with increasing investor confidence, and increased investing in anticipation of future
price increases (capital gains). A bullish trend in the stock market often begins before the general economy shows
clear signs of recovery. It is a win-win situation for the investors.
Examples
India's Bombay Stock Exchange Index, SENSEX, was in a bull market trend for about five years from April 2003 to
January 2008 as it increased from 2,900 points to 21,000 points. A notable bull market was in the 1990s and most of
the 1980s when the U.S. and many other stock markets rose; the end of this time period sees the dot-com bubble.
Bear market
A bear market is a general decline in the stock market over a period of time.[6] It is a transition from high investor
optimism to widespread investor fear and pessimism. According to The Vanguard Group, "While there’s no
agreed-upon definition of a bear market, one generally accepted measure is a price decline of 20% or more over at
least a two-month period."[7] It is sometimes referred to as "The Heifer Market" due to the paradox with the above
subject.
Examples
A bear market followed the Wall Street Crash of 1929 and erased 89% (from 386 to 40) of the Dow Jones Industrial
Average's market capitalization by July 1932, marking the start of the Great Depression. After regaining nearly 50%
of its losses, a longer bear market from 1937 to 1942 occurred in which the market was again cut in half. Another
long-term bear market occurred from about 1973 to 1982, encompassing the 1970s energy crisis and the high
unemployment of the early 1980s. Yet another bear market occurred between March 2000 and October 2002. The
most recent example occurred between October 2007 and March 2009.Market trend 18
Market top
A market top (or market high) is usually not a dramatic event. The market has simply reached the highest point that
it will, for some time (usually a few years). It is retroactively defined as market participants are not aware of it as it
happens. A decline then follows, usually gradually at first and later with more rapidity. William J. O'Neil and
company report that since the 1950s a market top is characterized by three to five distribution days in a major market
index occurring within a relatively short period of time. Distribution is a decline in price with higher volume than the
preceding session.
Examples
The peak of the dot-com bubble (as measured by the NASDAQ-100) occurred on March 24, 2000. The index closed
at 4,704.73 and has not since returned to that level. The Nasdaq peaked at 5,132.50 and the S&P 500 at 1525.20.
A recent peak for the broad U.S. market was October 9, 2007. The S&P 500 index closed at 1,576 and the Nasdaq at
2861.50.
Market bottom
A market bottom is a trend reversal, the end of a market downturn, and precedes the beginning of an upward moving
trend (bull market).
It is very difficult to identify a bottom (referred to by investors as "bottom picking") while it is occurring. The upturn
following a decline is often short-lived and prices might resume their decline. This would bring a loss for the
investor who purchased stock(s) during a misperceived or "false" market bottom.
Baron Rothschild is said to have advised that the best time to buy is when there is "blood in the streets", i.e., when
the markets have fallen drastically and investor sentiment is extremely negative.[8]
Examples
Some examples of market bottoms, in terms of the closing values of the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA)
include:
•The Dow Jones Industrial Average hit a bottom at 1738.74 on 19 October 1987, as a result of the decline from
2722.41 on 25 August 1987. This day was called Black Monday (chart[9] ).
•A bottom of 7286.27 was reached on the DJIA on 9 October 2002 as a result of the decline from 11722.98 on 14
January 2000. This included an intermediate bottom of 8235.81 on 21 September 2001 (a 14% change from 10
September) which led to an intermediate top of 10635.25 on 19 March 2002 (chart[10] ). The "tech-heavy" Nasdaq
fell a more precipitous 79% from its 5132 peak (10 March 2000) to its 1108 bottom (10 October 2002).
•A decline associated with the subprime mortgage crisis starting at 14164.41 on 9 October 2007 (DJIA) and caused
a bottom of 6,440.08 on 9 March 2009 (chart[11] ).
Investor sentiment
Investor sentiment is a contrarian stock market indicator.
By definition, the market balances buyers and sellers, so it's impossible to literally have 'more buyers than sellers' or
vice versa, although that is a common expression. The market comprises investors and traders. The investors may
own a stock for many years; traders put on a position for several weeks down to seconds.
Generally, the investors follow a buy low sell high strategy.[12] Traders attempt to "fade" the investors' actions (buy
when they are selling, sell when they are buying). A surge in demand from investors lifts the traders' asks, while a
surge in supply hits the traders' bids.
When a high proportion of investors express a bearish (negative) sentiment, some analysts consider it to be a strong 
signal that a market bottom may be near. The predictive capability of such a signal (see also market sentiment) isMarket trend 19
thought to be highest when investor sentiment reaches extreme values.[13] Indicators that measure investor sentiment
may include:
•Investor Intelligence Sentiment Index: If the Bull-Bear spread (% of Bulls - % of Bears) is close to a historic low,
it may signal a bottom. Typically, the number of bears surveyed would exceed the number of bulls. However, if
the number of bulls is at an extreme high and the number of bears is at an extreme low, historically, a market top
may have occurred or is close to occurring. This contrarian measure is more reliable for its coincidental timing at
market lows than tops.
•American Association of Individual Investors (AAII) sentiment indicator: Many feel that the majority of the
decline has already occurred once this indicator gives a reading of minus 15% or below.
•Other sentiment indicators include the Nova-Ursa ratio, the Short Interest/Total Market Float, and the Put/Call
ratio.
Market capitulation
Market capitulation refers to the threshold reached after a severe fall in the market, when large numbers of investors
can no longer tolerate the financial losses incurred.[14] These investors then capitulate (give up) and sell in panic, or
find that their pre-set sell stops have been triggered, thereby automatically liquidating their holdings in a given stock.
This may trigger a further decline in the stock's price, if not already anticipated by the market. Margin calls and
mutual fund and hedge fund redemptions significantly contribute to capitulations.
The contrarians consider a capitulation a sign of a possible bottom in prices. This is because almost everyone who
wanted (or was forced) to sell stock has already done so, leaving the buyers in the market, and they are expected to
drive the prices up.
The peak in volume may precede an actual bottom.
Changes with consumer behavior
Market trends are fluctuated on the demographics and technology. In a micro economical view, the current state of
consumer trust in spending will vary the circulation of currency. In a micro economical view, demographics within a
market will change the advancement of businesses and companies. With the introduction of the internet, consumers
have access to different vendors as well as substitute products and services changing the direction of which a market
will go.
Despite that it is believed that market trends follow one direction over a matter of time, there are many different
factors that change can change this idea. Technology s-curves, explained in the book The Innovator's Dilemma,
states that technology will start slow then increase in users once better understood but level off once another
technology replaces it, proving that change in the market is actually consistent.
Etymology
The precise origin of the phrases "bull market" and "bear market" are obscure. The Oxford English Dictionary cites
an 1891 use of the term "bull market". In French "bulle spéculative" refers to a speculative market bubble. The
Online Etymology Dictionary relates the word "bull" to "inflate, swell", and dates its stock market connotation to
1714.[15]
One hypothetical etymology points to London bearskin "jobbers" (market makers), who would sell bearskins before
the bears had actually been caught in contradiction of the proverb ne vendez pas la peau de l'ours avant de l’avoir tué
("don't sell the bearskin before you've killed the bear")—an admonition against over-optimism. By the time of the
South Sea Bubble of 1721, the bear was also associated with short selling; jobbers would sell bearskins they did not
own in anticipation of falling prices, which would enable them to buy them later for an additional profit.Market trend 20
Another plausible origin is from the word "bulla" which means bill, or contract. When a market is rising, holders of
contracts for future delivery of a commodity see the value of their contract increase. However in a falling market, the
counterparties—the "bearers" of the commodity to be delivered—win because they have locked in a future delivery
price that is higher than the current price.
Some analogies that have been used as mnemonic devices:
•Bull is short for 'bully', in its now mostly obsolete meaning of 'excellent'.
•It relates to the common use of these animals in blood sport, i.e. bear-baiting and bull-baiting.
•It refers to the way that the animals attack: a bull attacks upwards with its horns, while a bear swipes downwards
with its paws.
•It relates to the speed of the animals: bulls usually charge at very high speed whereas bears normally are thought
of as lazy and cautious movers—a misconception because a bear, under the right conditions, can outrun a
horse.[16]
•They were originally used in reference to two old merchant banking families, the Barings and the Bulstrodes.
•Bears hibernate, while bulls do not.
•The word "bull" plays off the market's returns being "full" whereas "bear" alludes to the market's returns being
"bare".
In describing financial market behavior, the largest group of market participants is often referred to, metaphorically,
as the herd. This is especially relevant to participants in bull markets since bulls are herding animals. A bull market
is also sometimes described as a bull run. Dow Theory attempts to describe the character of these market
movements.[17]
International sculpture team Mark and Diane Weisbeck were chosen to re-design Wall Street's Bull Market. Their
winning sculpture, the "Bull Market Rocket" was chosen as the modern, 21st century symbol of the up-trending Bull
Market.
Criticism
The concept of market trends is inconsistent with the standard academic view of the price movement of the financial
markets, the efficient-market hypothesis.[18] [19]
References
[1][Start Market Course, George Fontanills, Tom Gentile, John Wiley and Sons Inc. 2001,
p91http://books.google.com/books?id=gtrLvlojNzIC&pg=PA91&dq=stock+market+trends#v=onepage&q=stock%20market%20trends&f=false]
[2][Technical Analysis of Stock Trends, R.Edwards, J. McGee, WHC Bessetti, CRC Press, 2007, p17 http:/ / books. google. com/
books?id=wklriRw9a1oC& pg=PA17& dq=stock+ market+ trends#v=onepage& q=stock%20market%20trends& f=false]
[3][Technical Analysis of Stock Trends, R.Edwards, J. McGee, WHC Bessetti, CRC Press, 2007, p18 http:/ / books. google. com/
books?id=wklriRw9a1oC& pg=PA17& dq=stock+ market+ trends#v=onepage& q=stock%20market%20trends& f=false]
[4]Chart of gold 1968–99 (http:/ / www. kitco. com/ LFgif/ au968-999. gif)
[5]Technical Analysis of Stock Trends, Robert D. Edwards and John Magee p. 479
[6]O'Sullivan, Arthur; Steven M. Sheffrin (2003). Economics: Principles in Action. Pearson Prentice Hall. p. 290. ISBN 0-13-063085-3.
[7]" Staying calm during a bear market (https:/ / retirementplans. vanguard. com/ VGApp/ pe/
PubVgiNews?ArticleName=Stayingcalmbearmkt)". Vanguard Group.
[8]http:/ / www. fool. com/ investing/ small-cap/ 2007/ 05/ 02/ buy-when-theres-blood-in-the-streets. aspx Buy When There's Blood in the
Streets
[9]http:/ / stockcharts. com/ h-sc/ ui?s=$INDU& p=D& st=1987-08-01& en=1987-12-31& id=p95907824619 stockcharts.com chart
[10] http:/ / stockcharts. com/ h-sc/ ui?s=$INDU& p=D& st=2000-01-01& en=2002-12-31& id=p94927308656 stockcharts.com chart
[11] http:/ / stockcharts. com/ h-sc/ ui?s=$INDU& p=D& st=2007-06-01& en=2009-05-17& id=p70946023540
[12] Bad Timing Eats Away at Investor Returns (http:/ / news. morningstar. com/ articlenet/ article. aspx?id=325664)
[13] Trying to Plumb a Bottom, By MARK HULBERT, http:/ / online. barrons. com/ article/ SB122652105098621685. html
[14] http:/ / online. wsj. com/ article/ SB121685817512279283. html?mod=rss_whats_news_us_business Ellison's New Position: Cash Hoard, by
Diya Gullapalli, "I don't want to lose any more ..."
[15] Harper, Douglas. "bull" (http:/ / www. etymonline. com/ index. php?term=bull). Online Etymology Dictionary. .Market trend 21
[16] " The Speed Of Grizzly Bears" (http:/ / www. nps. gov/ history/ history/ online_books/ yell/ vol14-1-2a. htm) William E. Kearns, Assistant
Park Naturalist
[17] Efficient Markets or Herd Mentality? The Future of Economic Forecasting (http:/ / news. morningstar. com/ articlenet/ article.
aspx?postId=2731899) on news.morningstar.com
[18] http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ terms/ e/ efficientmarkethypothesis. asp
[19] [Technical Analysis of Stock Trends, R.Edwards, J. McGee, WHC Bessetti, CRC Press, 2007, p 17 http:/ / books. google. com/
books?id=wklriRw9a1oC& pg=PA17& dq=stock+ market+ trends#v=onepage& q=stock%20market%20trends& f=false]
External links
•Market trend definition, explanations, and examples provided in simple terms (http:/ / www. investopedia. com/
terms/ t/ trendanalysis. asp)
•Braze, David. What Is a Bear Market? (http:/ / www. fool. com/ retirement/ retireeport/ 2000/ retireeport000717.
htm) The Motley Fool.
•Stock Market Dictionary (http:/ / www. qwoter. com/ dictionary/ )
Dead cat bounce
Dead cat bounce is a Wall Street term that refers to a small, brief recovery in the price of a declining stock.[1]
History
The term "dead cat bounce" is derived from the idea that "even a dead cat will bounce if it falls from a great
height".[2] The phrase has been used on Wall Street for many years. The earliest use of the phrase dates from 1985
when the Singaporean and Malaysian stock markets bounced back after a hard fall during the recession of that year.
Journalist Christopher Sherwell of the Financial Times reported a stock broker as saying the market rise was a "dead
cat bounce". A similar expression has an older history in Cantonese and this may be the origin of the term.
Variations and usage
A short rise in price followed by a price decline of a stock is the standard usage of the term. In other instances the
term is used exclusively to refer to securities or stocks that are considered to be of low value. First, the securities
have poor past performance. Second, there is no indication of an impending rise in price. Lastly, there is no
indication that sustained growth is imminent should a major upward shift occur in the market.[2]
Some variations on the definition of the term include:
•A stock in a severe decline has a sharp bounce off the lows.[3]
•A small upward price movement in a bear market after which the market continues to fall.[4] [5] [6]
Technical analysis
A "dead cat bounce" price pattern may be considered part of the technical analysis method of stock trading. Price
patterns such as the dead cat bounce are recognized only with hindsight. Technical analysis describes a dead cat
bounce as a continuation pattern that looks in the beginning like a reversal pattern. It begins with a downward move
followed by a significant price retracement. The price fails to continue upward and instead falls again downwards,
and exceeds the prior low.[7]Dead cat bounce 22
Alternate meanings
The term has also been used in reference to political polling numbers.[8]
References
[1]Business Dictionary web site (http:/ / www. businessdictionary. com/ definition/ dead-cat-bounce. html)
[2]Wise Geek web site (http:/ / www. wisegeek. com/ what-is-a-dead-cat-bounce. htm)
[3]My Stock Market Power (http:/ / en. mimi. hu/ stockmarket/ dead_cat_bounce. html)
[4]Traders101 web site (http:/ / www. traders101. com/ trading-dictionary. asp?term=Dead cat bounce)
[5]The Phrase Finder (http:/ / www. phrases. org. uk/ meanings/ 108600. html)
[6]Investopedia web site (http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ terms/ d/ deadcatbounce. asp)
[7]Traders Log web site (http:/ / www. traderslog. com/ dead-cat-bounce. htm)
[8]Is this Gordon Brown's dead cat bounce? (http:/ / blogs. telegraph. co. uk/ news/ davidhughes/ 5496347/
Is_this_Gordon_Browns_dead_cat_bounce/ )
External links
•Investopedia.com (http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ terms/ d/ deadcatbounce. asp)
Elliott wave principle
Economic Waves series
(see Business cycles)
 Cycle/Wave Name  Years 
Kitchin inventory 3–5
Juglar fixed investment 7–11
Kuznets infrastructural investment 15–25
Kondratiev wave 45–60
The Elliott Wave Principle is a form of technical analysis that traders use to analyze financial market cycles and
forecast market trends by identifying extremes in investor psychology, highs and lows in prices, and other collective
factors. Ralph Nelson Elliott (1871–1948), a professional accountant, discovered the underlying social principles and
developed the analytical tools in the 1930s. He proposed that market prices unfold in specific patterns, which
practitioners today call Elliott waves, or simply waves. Elliott published his theory of market behavior in the book
The Wave Principle in 1938, summarized it in a series of articles in Financial World magazine in 1939, and covered
it most comprehensively in his final major work, Nature’s Laws: The Secret of the Universe in 1946. Elliott stated
that "because man is subject to rhythmical procedure, calculations having to do with his activities can be projected
far into the future with a justification and certainty heretofore unattainable."[1]Elliott wave principle 23
Overall design
From R.N. Elliott's essay, "The Basis of the Wave Principle,"
October 1940.
The Elliot Wave Principle posits that collective
investor psychology, or crowd psychology, moves
between optimism and pessimism in natural sequences.
These mood swings create patterns evidenced in the
price movements of markets at every degree of trend or
time scale.
In Elliott's model, market prices alternate between an
impulsive, or motive phase, and a corrective phase on
all time scales of trend, as the illustration shows.
Impulses are always subdivided into a set of 5
lower-degree waves, alternating again between motive
and corrective character, so that waves 1, 3, and 5 are
impulses, and waves 2 and 4 are smaller retraces of
waves 1 and 3. Corrective waves subdivide into 3
smaller-degree waves starting with a five-wave
counter-trend impulse, a retrace, and another impulse. In a bear market the dominant trend is downward, so the
pattern is reversed—five waves down and three up. Motive waves always move with the trend, while corrective
waves move against it.
Degree
The patterns link to form five and three-wave structures which themselves underlie self-similar wave structures of
increasing size or higher degree. Note the lower most of the three idealized cycles. In the first small five-wave
sequence, waves 1, 3 and 5 are motive, while waves 2 and 4 are corrective. This signals that the movement of the
wave one degree higher is upward. It also signals the start of the first small three-wave corrective sequence. After the
initial five waves up and three waves down, the sequence begins again and the self-similar fractal geometry begins to
unfold according to the five and three-wave structure which it underlies one degree higher. The completed motive
pattern includes 89 waves, followed by a completed corrective pattern of 55 waves.[2]
Each degree of a pattern in a financial market has a name. Practitioners use symbols for each wave to indicate both
function and degree—numbers for motive waves, letters for corrective waves (shown in the highest of the three
idealized series of wave structures or degrees). Degrees are relative; they are defined by form, not by absolute size or
duration. Waves of the same degree may be of very different size and/or duration.[2]
The classification of a wave at any particular degree can vary, though practitioners generally agree on the standard
order of degrees (approximate durations given):
•Grand supercycle: multi-century
•Supercycle: multi-decade (about 40-70 years)
•Cycle: one year to several years (or even several decades under an Elliott Extension)
•Primary: a few months to a couple of years
•Intermediate: weeks to months
•Minor: weeks
•Minute: days
•Minuette: hours
•Subminuette: minutesElliott wave principle 24
Elliott Wave personality and characteristics
Elliott wave analysts (or Elliotticians) hold that each individual wave has its own signature or characteristic, which
typically reflects the psychology of the moment.[2] [3] Understanding those personalities is key to the application of
the Wave Principle; they are defined below. (Definitions assume a bull market in equities; the characteristics apply
in reverse in bear markets.)
 Five wave pattern (dominant trend)  Three wave pattern (corrective trend) 
Wave 1: Wave one is rarely obvious at its inception. When the first wave of a new
bull market begins, the fundamental news is almost universally negative. The
previous trend is considered still strongly in force. Fundamental analysts continue to
revise their earnings estimates lower; the economy probably does not look strong.
Sentiment surveys are decidedly bearish, put options are in vogue, and implied
volatility in the options market is high. Volume might increase a bit as prices rise,
but not by enough to alert many technical analysts.Wave A: Corrections are typically harder to identify than
impulse moves. In wave A of a bear market, the fundamental
news is usually still positive. Most analysts see the drop as a
correction in a still-active bull market. Some technical
indicators that accompany wave A include increased
volume, rising implied volatility in the options markets and
possibly a turn higher in open interest in related futures
markets.
Wave 2: Wave two corrects wave one, but can never extend beyond the starting
point of wave one. Typically, the news is still bad. As prices retest the prior low,
bearish sentiment quickly builds, and "the crowd" haughtily reminds all that the bear
market is still deeply ensconced. Still, some positive signs appear for those who are
looking: volume should be lower during wave two than during wave one, prices
usually do not retrace more than 61.8% (see Fibonacci section below) of the wave
one gains, and prices should fall in a three wave pattern.Wave B: Prices reverse higher, which many see as a
resumption of the now long-gone bull market. Those
familiar with classical technical analysis may see the peak as
the right shoulder of a head and shoulders reversal pattern.
The volume during wave B should be lower than in wave A.
By this point, fundamentals are probably no longer
improving, but they most likely have not yet turned
negative.
Wave 3: Wave three is usually the largest and most powerful wave in a trend
(although some research suggests that in commodity markets, wave five is the
largest). The news is now positive and fundamental analysts start to raise earnings
estimates. Prices rise quickly, corrections are short-lived and shallow. Anyone
looking to "get in on a pullback" will likely miss the boat. As wave three starts, the
news is probably still bearish, and most market players remain negative; but by wave
three's midpoint, "the crowd" will often join the new bullish trend. Wave three often
extends wave one by a ratio of 1.618:1.Wave C: Prices move impulsively lower in five waves.
Volume picks up, and by the third leg of wave C, almost
everyone realizes that a bear market is firmly entrenched.
Wave C is typically at least as large as wave A and often
extends to 1.618 times wave A or beyond.
Wave 4: Wave four is typically clearly corrective. Prices may meander sideways for
an extended period, and wave four typically retraces less than 38.2% of wave three
(see Fibonacci relationships below). Volume is well below than that of wave three.
This is a good place to buy a pull back if you understand the potential ahead for wave
5. Still, fourth waves are often frustrating because of their lack of progress in the
larger trend.
Wave 5: Wave five is the final leg in the direction of the dominant trend. The news
is almost universally positive and everyone is bullish. Unfortunately, this is when
many average investors finally buy in, right before the top. Volume is often lower in
wave five than in wave three, and many momentum indicators start to show
divergences (prices reach a new high but the indicators do not reach a new peak). At
the end of a major bull market, bears may very well be ridiculed (recall how forecasts
for a top in the stock market during 2000 were received).Elliott wave principle 25
Pattern recognition and fractals
Elliott's market model relies heavily on looking at price charts. Practitioners study developing trends to distinguish
the waves and wave structures, and discern what prices may do next; thus the application of the wave principle is a
form of pattern recognition.
The structures Elliott described also meet the common definition of a fractal (self-similar patterns appearing at every
degree of trend). Elliott wave practitioners say that just as naturally-occurring fractals often expand and grow more
complex over time, the model shows that collective human psychology develops in natural patterns, via buying and
selling decisions reflected in market prices: "It's as though we are somehow programmed by mathematics. Seashell,
galaxy, snowflake or human: we're all bound by the same order."[4]
Elliott wave rules and guidelines
A correct Elliott wave "count" must observe three rules: 1) Wave 2 always retraces less than 100% of wave 1; 2)
Wave 3 cannot be the shortest of the three impulse waves, namely waves 1, 3 and 5; 3) Wave 4 does not overlap with
the price territory of wave 1, except in the rare case of a diagonal triangle. A common guideline observes that in a
five-wave pattern, waves 2 and 4 will often take alternate forms; a sharp move in wave 2, for example, will suggest a
mild move in wave 4. Corrective wave patterns unfold in forms known as zigzags, flats, or triangles. In turn these
corrective patterns can come together to form more complex corrections.[3]
Fibonacci relationships
R. N. Elliott's analysis of the mathematical properties of waves and patterns eventually led him to conclude that "The
Fibonacci Summation Series is the basis of The Wave Principle".[1] Numbers from the Fibonacci sequence surface
repeatedly in Elliott wave structures, including motive waves (1, 3, 5), a single full cycle (5 up, 3 down = 8 waves),
and the completed motive (89 waves) and corrective (55 waves) patterns. Elliott developed his market model before
he realized that it reflects the Fibonacci sequence. "When I discovered The Wave Principle action of market trends, I
had never heard of either the Fibonacci Series or the Pythagorean Diagram".[1]
The Fibonacci sequence is also closely connected to the Golden ratio (1.618). Practitioners commonly use this ratio
and related ratios to establish support and resistance levels for market waves, namely the price points which help
define the parameters of a trend.[5] See Fibonacci retracement.
Finance professor Roy Batchelor and researcher Richard Ramyar, a former Director of the United Kingdom Society
of Technical Analysts and Head of UK Asset Management Research at Reuters Lipper, studied whether Fibonacci
ratios appear non-randomly in the stock market, as Elliott's model predicts. The researchers said the "idea that prices
retrace to a Fibonacci ratio or round fraction of the previous trend clearly lacks any scientific rationale". They also
said "there is no significant difference between the frequencies with which price and time ratios occur in cycles in
the Dow Jones Industrial Average, and frequencies which we would expect to occur at random in such a time
series".[6]
Robert Prechter replied to the Batchelor–Ramyar study, saying that it "does not challenge the validity of any aspect
of the Wave Principle...it supports wave theorists' observations," and that because the authors had examined ratios
between prices achieved in filtered trends rather than Elliott waves, "their method does not address actual claims by
wave theorists".[7] The Socionomics Institute also reviewed data in the Batchelor–Ramyar study, and said these data
show "Fibonacci ratios do occur more often in the stock market than would be expected in a random
environment".[8]
Example of the Elliott Wave Principle and the Fibonacci relationshipElliott wave principle 26
From sakuragi_indofx, "Trading never been so easy eh," December
2007.
The GBP/JPY currency chart gives an example of a
fourth wave retracement apparently halting between the
38.2% and 50.0% Fibonacci retracements of a
completed third wave. The chart also highlights how
the Elliott Wave Principle works well with other
technical analysis tendencies as prior support (the
bottom of wave-1) acts as resistance to wave-4. The
wave count depicted in the chart would be invalidated
if GBP/JPY moves above the wave-1 low.
After Elliott
Following Elliott's death in 1948, other market
technicians and financial professionals continued to use
the wave principle and provide forecasts to investors.
Charles Collins, who had published Elliott's "Wave
Principle" and helped introduce Elliott's theory to Wall
Street, ranked Elliott's contributions to technical
analysis on a level with Charles Dow. Hamilton Bolton, founder of The Bank Credit Analyst, provided wave
analysis to a wide readership in the 1950s and 1960s. Bolton introduced Elliott's wave principle to A.J. Frost, who
provided weekly financial commentary on the Financial News Network in the 1980s. Frost co-authored Elliott Wave
Principle with Robert Prechter in 1978.
Rediscovery and current use
Robert Prechter came across Elliott's works while working as a market technician at Merrill Lynch. His prominence
as a forecaster during the bull market of the 1980s brought the greatest exposure to date to Elliott's work, and today
Prechter remains the most widely known Elliott analyst.[9]
Among market technicians, wave analysis is widely accepted as a component of their trade. Elliott's Wave principle
is among the methods included on the exam that analysts must pass to earn the Chartered Market Technician (CMT)
designation, the professional accreditation developed by the Market Technicians Association (MTA).
Robin Wilkin, Ex-Global Head of FX and Commodity Technical Strategy at JPMorgan Chase, says "the Elliott
Wave principle ... provides a probability framework as to when to enter a particular market and where to get out,
whether for a profit or a loss."[10]
Jordan Kotick, Global Head of Technical Strategy at Barclays Capital and past President of the Market Technicians
Association, has said that R. N. Elliott's "discovery was well ahead of its time. In fact, over the last decade or two,
many prominent academics have embraced Elliott’s idea and have been aggressively advocating the existence of
financial market fractals."[11]
One such academic is the physicist Didier Sornette, visiting professor at the Department of Earth and Space Science
and the Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics at UCLA. In a paper he co-authored in 1996 ("Stock Market
Crashes, Precursors and Replicas") Sornette said,
It is intriguing that the log-periodic structures documented here bear some similarity with the "Elliott waves" 
of technical analysis ... A lot of effort has been developed in finance both by academic and trading institutions 
and more recently by physicists (using some of their statistical tools developed to deal with complex times 
series) to analyze past data to get information on the future. The 'Elliott wave' technique is probably the most 
famous in this field. We speculate that the "Elliott waves", so strongly rooted in the financial analysts’Elliott wave principle 27
folklore, could be a signature of an underlying critical structure of the stock market.[12]
Paul Tudor Jones, the billionaire commodity trader, calls Prechter and Frost's standard text on Elliott "a classic," and
one of "the four Bibles of the business":
[Magee and Edwards'] Technical Analysis of Stock Trends and The Elliott Wave Theorist both give very
specific and systematic ways to approach developing great reward/risk ratios for entering into a business
contract with the marketplace, which is what every trade should be if properly and thoughtfully executed.[13]
Criticism
The premise that markets unfold in recognizable patterns contradicts the efficient market hypothesis, which states
that prices cannot be predicted from market data such as moving averages and volume. By this reasoning, if
successful market forecasts were possible, investors would buy (or sell) when the method predicted a price increase
(or decrease), to the point that prices would rise (or fall) immediately, thus destroying the profitability and predictive
power of the method. In efficient markets, knowledge of the Elliott Wave Principle among traders would lead to the
disappearance of the very patterns they tried to anticipate, rendering the method, and all forms of technical analysis,
useless.
Benoit Mandelbrot has questioned whether Elliott waves can predict financial markets:
But Wave prediction is a very uncertain business. It is an art to which the subjective judgement of the chartists
matters more than the objective, replicable verdict of the numbers. The record of this, as of most technical
analysis, is at best mixed.[14]
Robert Prechter had previously stated that ideas in an article by Mandelbrot[15] "originated with Ralph Nelson
Elliott, who put them forth more comprehensively and more accurately with respect to real-world markets in his
1938 book The Wave Principle."[16]
Critics also warn the wave principle is too vague to be useful, since it cannot consistently identify when a wave
begins or ends, and that Elliott wave forecasts are prone to subjective revision. Some who advocate technical
analysis of markets have questioned the value of Elliott wave analysis. Technical analyst David Aronson wrote:[17]
The Elliott Wave Principle, as popularly practiced, is not a legitimate theory, but a story, and a compelling one
that is eloquently told by Robert Prechter. The account is especially persuasive because EWP has the
seemingly remarkable ability to fit any segment of market history down to its most minute fluctuations. I
contend this is made possible by the method's loosely defined rules and the ability to postulate a large number
of nested waves of varying magnitude. This gives the Elliott analyst the same freedom and flexibility that
allowed pre-Copernican astronomers to explain all observed planet movements even though their underlying
theory of an Earth-centered universe was wrong.
Notes
[1]Elliott, Ralph Nelson (1994). Prechter, Robert R., Jr.. ed. R.N. Elliott's Masterworks. Gainesville, GA: New Classics Library. pp. 70, 217,
194, 196. ISBN 978-0932750761.
[2]Poser, Steven W. (2003). Applying Elliott Wave Theory Profitably. New York: John Wiley and Sons. pp. 2–17. ISBN 978-0471420071.
[3]Frost, A.J.; Prechter, Robert R., Jr. (2005). Elliott Wave Principle (10th ed.). Gainesville, GA: New Classics Library. pp. 31, 78–85.
ISBN 978-0-932750-75-4.
[4]John Casti (31 August 2002). "I know what you'll do next summer". New Scientist, p. 29.
[5]Alex Douglas, "Fibonacci: The man & the markets," Standard & Poor's Economic Research Paper, February 20, 2001, pp. 8–10. PDF
document here (http:/ / www. analistademercado. com. br/ Fibonacci01. pdf)
[6]Roy Batchelor and Richard Ramyar, "Magic numbers in the Dow," 25th International Symposium on Forecasting, 2005, p. 13, 31. PDF
document here (http:/ / www. cass. city. ac. uk/ media/ stories/ resources/ Magic_Numbers_in_the_Dow. pdf)
[7]Robert Prechter (2006), "Elliott Waves, Fibonacci, and Statistics," p. 2. PDF document here (http:/ / www. socionomics. org/ pdf/
EW_Fibo_Statistics. pdf)
[8]Deepak Goel (2006), "Another Look at Fibonacci Statistics". PDF document here (http:/ / www. socionomics. net/ pdf/ Fibo_Statistics. pdf)Elliott wave principle 28
[9]Landon Jr., Thomas (13 October 2007), "The Man Who Won as Others Lost" (http:/ / www. nytimes. com/ 2007/ 10/ 13/ business/
13speculate. html?scp=1& sq=robert prechter& st=cse), The New York Times, , retrieved 26 May 2010
[10] Robin Wilkin, Riding the Waves: Applying Elliott Wave Theory to the Financial and Commodity Markets (http:/ / www. lbma. org. uk/
docs/ alchemist/ alch43_elliott3. pdf) The Alchemist June 2006
[11] Jordan Kotick, An Introduction to the Elliott Wave Principle (http:/ / www. lbma. org. uk/ docs/ alchemist/ alch40_elliott. pdf) The
Alchemist November 2005
[12] Sornette, D., Johansen, A., and Bouchaud, J.P. (1996). "Stock market crashes, precursors and replicas." Journal de Physique I France 6,
No.1, pp. 167–175.
[13] Mark B. Fisher, The Logical Trader, p. x (forward)
[14] Mandelbrot, Benoit and Richard L. Hudson (2004). The (mis)Behavior of Markets, New York: Basic Books, p. 245
[15] Mandelbrot, Benoit (February 1999). Scientific American, p. 70.
[16] Details here. (http:/ / www. elliottwave. com/ response/ default. htm)
[17] Aronson, David R. (2006). Evidence-Based Technical Analysis (http:/ / www. wiley. com/ WileyCDA/ WileyTitle/
productCd-0470008741,descCd-authorInfo. html), Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley and Sons, p. 61. ISBN 978-0-470-00874-4.
References
•Elliott Wave Principle: Key to Market Behavior by A.J. Frost & Robert R. Prechter, Jr. Published by New
Classics Library. ISBN 978-0-932750-75-4
•Mastering Elliott Wave: Presenting the Neely Method: The First Scientific, Objective Approach to Market
Forecasting with Elliott Wave Theory by Glenn Neely with Eric Hall. Published by Windsor Books. ISBN
0-930233-44-1
•Applying Elliott Wave Theory Profitably by Steven W. Poser. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. ISBN
0-471-42007-7
•R.N. Elliott's Masterworks by R.N. Elliott, edited by Robert R. Prechter, Jr. Published by New Classics Library.
ISBN 978-0932750761
External links
•investorwords.com glossary - Elliott Wave Theory (http:/ / www. investorwords. com/ 1688/
Elliott_Wave_Theory. html)
•Elliott Wave International - What Is the Wave Principle? (http:/ / www. elliottwave. com/ education/ welcome/ 1.
htm)Fibonacci retracement 29
Fibonacci retracement
Fibonacci retracement levels shown on the USD/CAD currency pair. In this case, price
retraced approximately 38.2% of a move down before continuing.
Fibonacci retracements are a method
of technical analysis for determining
support and resistance levels. They are
named after their use of the Fibonacci
sequence. Fibonacci retracement is
based on the idea that markets will
retrace a predictable portion of a move,
after which they will continue to move
in the original direction.
Fibonacci retracement is created by
taking two extreme points on a chart
and dividing the vertical distance by
the key Fibonacci ratios. 0.0% is
considered to be the start of the
retracement, while 100.0% is a
complete reversal to the original part
of the move. Once these levels are
identified, horizontal lines are drawn
and used to identify possible support
and resistance levels
Fibonacci ratios
Fibonacci ratios are mathematical relationships, expressed as ratios, derived from the Fibonacci sequence. The key
Fibonacci ratios are 0%, 23.6%, 38.2%, 50%, 61.8% and 100%.
The key Fibonacci ratio of 0.618 is derived by dividing any number in the sequence by the number that immediately
follows it. For example: 8/13 is approximately 0.6154, and 55/89 is approximately 0.6180.
The 0.382 ratio is found by dividing any number in the sequence by the number that is found two places to the right.
For example: 34/89 is approximately 0.3820.
The 0.236 ratio is found by dividing any number in the sequence by the number that is three places to the right. For
example: 55/233 is approximately 0.2361.
The 0 ratio is :Fibonacci retracement 30
Other ratios
The 0.764 ratio is the result of subtracting 0.236 from the number 1.
The 0.786 ratio is :
The 0.500 ratio is derived from dividing the number 1 (third number in the sequence) by the number 2 (forth number
in the sequence).
Further reading
•Stevens, Leigh (2002). Essential technical analysis: tools and techniques to spot market trends. New York:
Wiley. ISBN 047115279X. OCLC 48532501.
•Brown, Constance M. (2008). Fibonacci analysis. New York: Bloomberg Press. ISBN 1576602613.
•Posamentier, Alfred S.; Lehmann, Ingmar (2007). The fabulous Fibonacci numbers. Amherst, NY: Prometheus
Books. ISBN 1591024757.
External links
•What is Fibonacci retracement, and where do the ratios that are used come from? [1] at investopedia.com
•Fibonacci Retracements [2] at stockcharts.com
•How to draw Fibonacci retracement, and how to analyze it? [3] at lollymotion.com
References
[1]http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ ask/ answers/ 05/ FibonacciRetracement. asp
[2]http:/ / stockcharts. com/ school/ doku. php?id=chart_school:chart_analysis:fibonacci_retracemen
[3]http:/ / lollymotion. com/ fibonacci/ fibonacci-retracementPivot point 31
Pivot point
A pivot point is a price level of significance in technical analysis of a financial market that is used by traders as a
predictive indicator of market movement. A pivot point is calculated as an average of significant prices (high, low,
close) from the performance of a market in the prior trading period. If the market in the following period trades
above the pivot point it is usually evaluated as a bullish sentiment, whereas trading below the pivot point is seen as
bearish.
Monthly pivot point chart of the Dow Jones Industrials average for the first 8 months of
2009, showing sets of first and second levels of resistance (green) and support (red). The
pivot point levels are highlighted in yellow. Trading below the pivot point, particularly at
the beginning of a trading period sets a bearish market sentiment and often results in
further price decline, while trading above it, bullish price action may continue for some
time.
It is customary to calculate additional
levels of support and resistance, below
and above the pivot point, respectively,
by subtracting or adding price
differentials calculated from previous
trading ranges of the market.
A pivot point and the associated
support and resistance levels are often
turning points for the direction of price
movement in a market. In an
up-trending market, the pivot point and
the resistance levels may represent a
ceiling level in price above which the
uptrend is no longer sustainable and a
reversal may occur. In a declining
market, a pivot point and the support
levels may represent a low price level
of stability or a resistance to further
decline.
Calculation
Several methods exist for calculating the pivot point (P) of a market. Most commonly, it is the arithmetic average of
the high (H), low (L), and closing (C) prices of the market in the prior trading period:
P = (H + L + C) / 3.
Sometimes, the average also includes the previous period's or the current period's opening price (O):
P = (O + H + L + C) / 4.
In other cases, traders like to emphasize the closing price, P = (H + L + C + C) / 4, or the current periods opening
price, P = (H + L + O + O) / 4.
Support and resistance levels
Price support and resistance levels are key trading tools in any market. Their roles may be interchangeable,
depending on whether the price level is approached in an up-trending or a down-trending market. These price levels
may be derived from many market assumptions and conventions. In pivot point analysis, several levels, usually
three, are commonly recognized below and above the pivot point. These are calculated from the range of price
movement in the previous trading period, added to the pivot point for resistances and subtracted from it for support
levels.Pivot point 32
The first and most significant level of support (S1) and resistance (R1) is obtained by recognition of the upper and the
lower halves of the prior trading range, defined by the trading above the pivot point (H − P), and below it (P − L).
The first resistance on the up-side of the market is given by the lower width of prior trading added to the pivot point
price and the first support on the down-side is the width of the upper part of the prior trading range below the pivot
point.
•R1 = P + (P − L) = 2×P − L
•S1 = P − (H − P) = 2×P − H
Thus, these levels may simply be calculated by subtracting the previous low (L) and high (H) price, respectively,
from twice the pivot point value:[1]
The second set of resistance (R2) and support (S2) levels are above and below, respectively, the first set. They are
simply determined from the full width of the prior trading range (H − L), added to and subtracted from the pivot
point, respectively:
•R2 = P + (H − L)
•S2 = P − (H − L)
Commonly a third set is also calculated, again representing another higher resistance level (R3) and a yet lower
support level (S3). The method of the second set is continued by doubling the range added and subtracted from the
pivot point:
•R3 = P + 2×(H − L)
•S3 = P − 2×(H − L)
This concept is sometimes, albeit rarely, extended to a fourth set in which the tripled value of the trading range is
used in the calculation.
Qualitatively, the second and higher support and resistance levels are always located symmetrically around the pivot
point, whereas this is not the case for the first levels, unless the pivot point happens to divide the prior trading range
exactly in half.
Trading tool
The pivot point itself represents a level of highest resistance or support, depending on the overall market condition.
If the market is directionless (undecided), prices will often fluctuate greatly around this level until a price breakout
develops. Trading above or below the pivot point indicates the overall market sentiment. It is a leading indicator
providing advanced signaling of potentially new market highs or lows within a given time frame.[1]
The support and resistance levels calculated from the pivot point and the previous market width may be used as exit
points of trades, but are rarely used as entry signals. For example, if the market is up-trending and breaks through the
pivot point, the first resistance level is often a good target to close a position, as the probability of resistance and
reversal increases greatly.Pivot point 33
5-day pivot point chart of the SPDR Gold Trust (GLD) for intra-day trading in October 2009
Many traders recognize the half-way levels between any of these levels as additional, but weaker resistance or
support areas.[2] The half-way (middle) point between the pivot point and R1 is designated M+, between R1 and R2 is
M++, and below the pivot point the middle points are labeled as M− and M−−. In the 5-day intra-day chart of the
SPDR Gold Trust (above) the middle points can clearly be identified as support in days 1, 3, and 4, and as resistance
in days 2 and 3.
References
[1]John L. Person, Candlestick and Pivot Point Trading Triggers, John Wiley & Sons (2007), ISBN 978-0-471-98022-3
[2]"Pivot points with half-way levels" (http:/ / www. stockstoshop. com/ pivots. htm). .Dow Theory 34
Dow Theory
Dow Theory on stock price movement is a form of technical analysis that includes some aspects of sector rotation.
The theory was derived from 255 Wall Street Journal editorials written by Charles H. Dow (1851–1902), journalist,
founder and first editor of the Wall Street Journal and co-founder of Dow Jones and Company. Following Dow's
death, William Peter Hamilton, Robert Rhea and E. George Schaefer organized and collectively represented "Dow
Theory," based on Dow's editorials. Dow himself never used the term "Dow Theory," nor presented it as a trading
system.
The six basic tenets of Dow Theory as summarized by Hamilton, Rhea, and Schaefer are described below.
Six basic tenets of Dow Theory
1.The market has three movements
(1) The "main movement", primary movement or major trend may last from less than a year to several years. It
can be bullish or bearish. (2) The "medium swing", secondary reaction or intermediate reaction may last from
ten days to three months and generally retraces from 33% to 66% of the primary price change since the
previous medium swing or start of the main movement. (3) The "short swing" or minor movement varies with
opinion from hours to a month or more. The three movements may be simultaneous, for instance, a daily
minor movement in a bearish secondary reaction in a bullish primary movement.
2.Market trends have three phases
Dow Theory asserts that major market trends are composed of three phases: an accumulation phase, a public
participation phase, and a distribution phase. The accumulation phase (phase 1) is a period when investors "in
the know" are actively buying (selling) stock against the general opinion of the market. During this phase, the
stock price does not change much because these investors are in the minority absorbing (releasing) stock that
the market at large is supplying (demanding). Eventually, the market catches on to these astute investors and a
rapid price change occurs (phase 2). This occurs when trend followers and other technically oriented investors
participate. This phase continues until rampant speculation occurs. At this point, the astute investors begin to
distribute their holdings to the market (phase 3).
3.The stock market discounts all news
Stock prices quickly incorporate new information as soon as it becomes available. Once news is released,
stock prices will change to reflect this new information. On this point, Dow Theory agrees with one of the
premises of the efficient market hypothesis.
4.Stock market averages must confirm each other
In Dow's time, the US was a growing industrial power. The US had population centers but factories were
scattered throughout the country. Factories had to ship their goods to market, usually by rail. Dow's first stock
averages were an index of industrial (manufacturing) companies and rail companies. To Dow, a bull market in
industrials could not occur unless the railway average rallied as well, usually first. According to this logic, if
manufacturers' profits are rising, it follows that they are producing more. If they produce more, then they have
to ship more goods to consumers. Hence, if an investor is looking for signs of health in manufacturers, he or
she should look at the performance of the companies that ship the output of them to market, the railroads. The
two averages should be moving in the same direction. When the performance of the averages diverge, it is a
warning that change is in the air.
Both Barron's Magazine and the Wall Street Journal still publish the daily performance of the Dow Jones
Transportation Index in chart form. The index contains major railroads, shipping companies, and air freight
carriers in the US.
5.Trends are confirmed by volumeDow Theory 35
Dow believed that volume confirmed price trends. When prices move on low volume, there could be many
different explanations why. An overly aggressive seller could be present for example. But when price
movements are accompanied by high volume, Dow believed this represented the "true" market view. If many
participants are active in a particular security, and the price moves significantly in one direction, Dow
maintained that this was the direction in which the market anticipated continued movement. To him, it was a
signal that a trend is developing.
6.Trends exist until definitive signals prove that they have ended
Dow believed that trends existed despite "market noise". Markets might temporarily move in the direction
opposite to the trend, but they will soon resume the prior move. The trend should be given the benefit of the
doubt during these reversals. Determining whether a reversal is the start of a new trend or a temporary
movement in the current trend is not easy. Dow Theorists often disagree in this determination. Technical
analysis tools attempt to clarify this but they can be interpreted differently by different investors.
Analysis
There is little academic support for the profitability of the Dow Theory. Alfred Cowles in a study in Econometrica in
1934 showed that trading based upon the editorial advice would have resulted in earning less than a buy-and-hold
strategy using a well diversified portfolio. Cowles concluded that a buy-and-hold strategy produced 15.5%
annualized returns from 1902-1929 while the Dow Theory strategy produced annualized returns of 12%. After
numerous studies supported Cowles over the following years, many academics stopped studying Dow Theory
believing Cowles's results were conclusive.
In recent years however, Cowles' conclusions have been revisited. William Goetzmann, Stephen Brown, and Alok
Kumar believe that Cowles' study was incomplete [1] and that Dow Theory produces excess risk-adjusted returns.[2]
Specifically, the return of a buy-and-hold strategy was higher than that of a Dow Theory portfolio by 2%, but the
riskiness and volatility of the Dow Theory portfolio was lower, so that the Dow Theory portfolio produced higher
risk-adjusted returns according to their study. Nevertheless, adjusting returns for risk is controversial in the context
of the Dow Theory. One key problem with any analysis of Dow Theory is that the editorials of Charles Dow did not
contain explicitly defined investing "rules" so some assumptions and interpretations are necessary.
Many technical analysts consider Dow Theory's definition of a trend and its insistence on studying price action as the
main premises of modern technical analysis.
References
[1]http:/ / viking. som. yale. edu/ will/ newsclips/ newsclip. html#The%20New%20York%20Times%209/ 6/ 98
[2]The Dow Theory: William Peter Hamilton's Record Reconsidered (http:/ / viking. som. yale. edu/ will/ dow/ dowpaper. htm)
Further reading
•Scott Peterson: The Wall Street Journal,Technically, A Challenge for Blue Chips, Vol. 250, No. 122, November
23, 2007.
External links
•Goetzmann's Dow Page (http:/ / viking. som. yale. edu/ will/ dow/ dowpage. html) Includes a link to Dow's
editorials and links to numerous articles describing support of Dow Theory.
•Alfred Cowle's Yale Page with selected publications (http:/ / cowles. econ. yale. edu/ archive/ people/ directors/
cowles. htm)
•Richard Russell's Dow Theory letters (http:/ / www. dowtheoryletters. com/ ) weekly newsletter and charts.
•John Hussman discusses Dow Theory (http:/ / www. hussmanfunds. com/ wmc/ wmc080211. htm)Dow Theory 36
•Record of Dow Theory Signals (http:/ / www. thedowtheory. com/ Description& results. html)
Classic Books by Dow Theorists
•Dow Theory for the 21st Century, by Jack Schannep (http:/ / www. amazon. com/ dp/ 0470240598)
•Dow Theory Today, by Richard Russell (http:/ / www. amazon. com/ dp/ 0870340611)
•The Dow Theory, by Robert Rhea (http:/ / www. amazon. com/ dp/ 0870341103)
•The Stock Market Barometer, by William Hamilton (http:/ / www. amazon. com/ dp/ 1602060061)
•The ABC of Stock Speculation, by S.A. Nelson (http:/ / www. amazon. com/ dp/ 1602069921)37
CHARTS
Candlestick chart
Candlestick chart of EURUSD
A candlestick chart is a style of
bar-chart used primarily to describe
price movements of a security,
derivative, or currency over time.
It is a combination of a line-chart and a
bar-chart, in that each bar represents the
range of price movement over a given
time interval. It is most often used in
technical analysis of equity and
currency price patterns. They appear
superficially similar to error bars, but
are unrelated.
History
Candlestick charts are thought to have
been developed in the 18th century by
Japanese rice trader of financial instruments.
Candlestick chart topics
The basic candlestick
Candlesticks are usually composed of the body (black or
white), and an upper and a lower shadow (wick): the area
between the open and the close is called the real body,
price excursions above and below the real body are called
shadows. The wick illustrates the highest and lowest
traded prices of a security during the time interval
represented. The body illustrates the opening and closing
trades. If the security closed higher than it opened, the
body is white or unfilled, with the opening price at the
bottom of the body and the closing price at the top. If the
security closed lower than it opened, the body is black,
with the opening price at the top and the closing price at
the bottom. A candlestick need not have either a body or
a wick.
To better highlight price movements, modern candlestick charts (especially those displayed digitally) often replace
the black or white of the candlestick body with colors such as red (for a lower closing) and blue or green (for a
higher closing).Candlestick chart 38
Candlestick simple patterns
There are multiple forms of candlestick chart patterns
Complex Patterns
In addition to the rather simple patterns depicted in the section above, there are more complex and difficult patterns
which have been identified since the charting method's inception. Complex patterns can be colored or highlighted for
better visualization.
Candlestick charts also convey more information than other forms of charts, such as bar charts. Just as with bar
charts, they display the absolute values of the open, high, low, and closing price for a given period. But they also
show how those prices are relative to the prior periods' prices, so one can tell by looking at one bar if the price action
is higher or lower than the prior one. They are also visually easier to look at , and can be coloured for even better
definition. Rather than using the open-high-low-close for a given time period (for example, 5 minute, 1 hour, 1 day,
1 month), candlesticks can also be constructed using the open-high-low-close of a specified volume range (for
example, 1,000; 100,000; 1 million shares per candlestick).
Use of candlestick charts
Candlestick charts are a visual aid for decision making in stock, forex, commodity, and options trading. For example,
when the bar is white and high relative to other time periods, it means buyers are very bullish. The opposite is true
for a black bar.
Heikin-Ashi candlesticks
Heikin-Ashi (Japanese for 'average bar') candlesticks are a weighted version of candlesticks calculated with the
following formula:
•Open = (open of previous bar+close of previous bar)/2
•Close = (open+high+low+close)/4
•High = maximum of high, open, or close (whichever is highest)
•Low = minimum of low, open, or close (whichever is lowest)
Heikin-Ashi candlesticks must be used with caution with regards to the price as the body doesn't necessarily sync up
with the actual open/close. Unlike with regular candlesticks, a long wick shows more strength, whereas the same
period on a standard chart might show a long body with little or no wick. Depending on the software or user
preference, Heikin-Ashi may be used to chart the price (instead of line, bar, or candlestick), as an indicator overlaid
on a regular chart, or an as indicator plotted on a separate window.
See also
•Kagi chart
•Pivot point calculations
•Chart pattern
•Open-high-low-close chart
•Hikkake PatternCandlestick chart 39
External links
•Tutorial of 16 Candlestick patterns with charts and explanations [1]
References
[1]http:/ / www. onlinetradingconcepts. com/ TechnicalAnalysis/ Candlesticks/ CandlestickBasics. html
Open-high-low-close chart
An OHLC chart, with a moving average and Bollinger bands
superimposed.
An open-high-low-close chart (also OHLC chart, or
simply bar chart) is a type of chart typically used to
illustrate movements in the price of a financial
instrument over time. Each vertical line on the chart
shows the price range (the highest and lowest prices)
over one unit of time, e.g. one day or one hour. Tick
marks project from each side of the line indicating the
opening price (e.g. for a daily bar chart this would be
the starting price for that day) on the left, and the
closing price for that time period on the right. The bars
may be shown in different hues depending on whether
prices rose or fell in that period.
The Japanese candlestick chart is another way of
displaying market price data, with the opening and
closing prices defining a rectangle within the range for each time unit. Both charts show exactly the same data, i.e.
the opening, high, low, and closing prices during a particular time frame. Some traders find the candlestick chart
easier to read.
External links
•http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ terms/ o/ ohlcchart. aspLine chart 40
Line chart
This simple graph shows
data over intervals with
connected points
A line chart or line graph is a type of graph, which displays information as a series of
data points connected by straight line segments.[1] It is a basic type of chart common in
many fields. It is an extension of a scatter graph, and is created by connecting a series of
points that represent individual measurements with line segments. A line chart is often
used to visualize a trend in data over intervals of time – a time series – thus the line is
often drawn chronologically.[2]
Example
In the experimental sciences, data collected from experiments are often visualized by a
graph that includes an overlaid mathematical function depicting the best-fit trend of the
scattered data. This layer is referred to as a best-fit layer and the graph containing this
layer is often referred to as a line graph.
For example, if one were to collect data on the speed of a body at certain points in time, one could visualize the data
by a data table such as the following:
Graph of Speed Vs Time
 Elapsed Time (s) Speed (ms−1)
0 0
1 3
2 7
3 12
4 20
5 30
6 45
The table "visualization" is a great way of displaying exact values, but a very bad way of understanding the
underlying patterns that those values represent. Because of these qualities, the table display is often erroneouslyLine chart 41
conflated with the data itself; whereas it is just another visualization of the data.
Understanding the process described by the data in the table is aided by producing a graph or line chart of Speed
versus Time. In this context, Versus (or the abbreviations vs and VS), separates the parameters appearing in an X-Y
(two-dimensional) graph. The first argument indicates the dependent variable, usually appearing on the Y-axis, while
the second argument indicates the independent variable, usually appearing on the X-axis. So, the graph of Speed
versus Time would plot time along the x-axis and speed up the y-axis. Mathematically, if we denote time by the
variable , and speed by , then the function plotted in the graph would be denoted indicating that (the
dependent variable) is a function of .
It is simple to construct a "best-fit" layer consisting of a set of line segments connecting adjacent data points;
however, such a "best-fit" is usually not an ideal representation of the trend of the underlying scatter data for the
following reasons:
1.It is highly improbable that the discontinuities in the slope of the best-fit would correspond exactly with the
positions of the measurement values.
2.It is highly unlikely that the experimental error in the data is negligible, yet the curve falls exactly through each of
the data points.
A true best-fit layer should depict a continuous mathematical function whose parameters are determined by using a
suitable error-minimization scheme, which appropriately weights the error in the data values.
In either case, the best-fit layer can reveal trends in the data. Further, measurements such as the gradient or the area
under the curve can be made visually, leading to more conclusions or results from the data.
References
[1]Burton G. Andreas (1965). Experimental psychology‎. p.186
[2]Neil J. Salkind (2006). Statistics for People who (think They) Hate Statistics: The Excel Edition. page 106.Point and figure chart 42
Point and figure chart
Point and figure is a charting technique used in technical analysis, used to attempt to predict financial market
prices. Point and figure charting is unique in that it does not plot price against time as all other techniques do. Instead
it plots price against changes in direction by plotting a column of Xs as the price rises and a column of Os as the
price falls.
History
The technique is over 100 years old. "Hoyle" was the first to write about it and showed charts in his 1898 book, The
Game in Wall Street.[1] Richard Wyckoff also described the technique with charts in his 1910 classic, Studies in
Tape Reading. The first book/manual dedicated to Point and Figure was written by Victor Devilliers in 1933.
Chartcraft Inc, in the USA, popularized the system in the 1940s. Cohen founded Chartcraft and wrote on point and
figure charting in 1947. Chartcraft published further pioneering books on P&F charting, namely those by Burke, Aby
and Zieg. Chartcraft Inc is still running today, providing daily point and figure services for the US market under the
name of Investors Intelligence. Veteran Mike Burke still works for Chartcraft, having started back in 1962 under the
guidance of Cohen. Burke went on to train other point and figure gurus, such as Dorsey.
A detailed history can be found in Jeremy du Plessis’ ‘The Definitive Guide to Point and Figure’ where many
references and examples are cited.
Du Plessis describes their development from a price recording system to a charting method. Traders kept track of
prices by writing them down in columns. They noticed patterns in their price record and started referring to them
first as ‘fluctuation charts’ and then as ‘figure charts’. They started using Xs instead of numbers and these charts
became known as ‘point charts’. Traders used both point charts and figure charts together and referred to them as
their point and figure charts, which is where Du Plessis suggests the name point and figure came from. Modern point
and figure charts are drawn with Xs and Os where columns of Xs are rising prices and columns of Os are falling
prices, although many tradionalists such as David Fuller and Louise Yamada still use the Xs only point method of
plotting.
How to drawPoint and figure chart 43
The correct way to draw a point and figure chart is to plot every price
change but practicality has rendered this difficult to do for a large
quantity of stocks so many point and figure chartists use the summary
prices at the end of each day. Some prefer to use the day’s closing price
and some prefer to use the day’s high or low depending on the direction
of the last column. The high/low method was invented by A.W. Cohen
in his 1947 book, 'How to Use the Three-Point Reversal Method of
Point & Figure Stock Market Timing' and has a large following.
The charts are constructed by deciding on the value represented by
each X and O. Any price change below this value is ignored so point
and figure acts as a filter to filter out the smaller price changes. The
charts change column when the price changes direction by the value of
a certain number of Xs or Os. Traditionally this was one and is called a
1 box reversal chart. More common is three, called a 3 box reversal
chart.
45 Degree Trend lines
Because point and figure charts are plotted on squared paper, 45 degree lines may be used to define up trends and
down trends from important highs and lows on the chart allowing objective analysis of trends.
Price Targets
Also in common usage are two methods of obtaining price targets from point and figure charts. The vertical method
measures the length of the thrust off a high or low and projects the thrust to obtain a target. The horizontal method
measures the width of a congestion pattern and uses that to obtain a target.
Computerization
In the US, Chartcraft used an IBM S/360 in the 1960s to produce point and figure charts.
Point and Figure charts were automated in the UK in the early 1980s by the Indexia company run by Jeremy Du
Plessis. This automation increased the popularity and usage of point and figure charts because hundreds of charts
could be viewed and altered quickly and easily. At the same time a method of log scaling point and figure charts was
devised, where the value of the Xs and Os was set to a percentage rather than a price. This allowed the sensitivity of
Point and Figure charts to remain constant no matter what the price level.
Kaufman, in New Trading Systems and Methods, 2005, documents research he and Kermit Zeig performed over
many years computerizing point and figure charting. LeBeau and Lucas also developed computerized point and
figure charts in Technical Traders Guide to Computer Analysis of the Futures Markets.Point and figure chart 44
External links
•Sample P&F chart of gold, circa January 2009 [2]
Further reading
•Aby, Carroll D.Jr. Point & Figure Charting: The Complete Guide, ISBN 0-934380-30-9
•Anderson, J.A. and Faff, R. "Point and Figure Charting: A Computational Methodology and Trading Performance
in the S&P 500 Futures Market", International Review of Financial Analysis (Forthcoming, 2006)
•Anderson, J.A., 2004. "P&F Charting - Computational Method and Distributional Forms", chapter in
Computational Finance & Its Applications, Witpress, UK
•Burke, Michael L. All New Guide to the Three-Point Reversal Method of Point and Figure, 116 pages, ringbound,
ISBN 99931-2-861-9.
•Cohen, A.W. How to Use the Three-Point Reversal Method of Point & Figure Stock Market Timing first edition
1947 - Out Of Print
•Cohen, A.W. The Chartcraft method of point and figure trading - A technical approach to stock market trading
•Cohen, A.W. Technical indicator analysis by point & figure technique
•De Villiers, Victor and Owen Taylor. The Point and Figure Method - of anticipating Stock Price Movements,
ISBN 1-883272-83-1
•De Villiers, Victor The Point and Figure Method - of anticipating Stock Price Movements - A reprint of the 1933
edition including a chart on the 1929 crash, ISBN 0-930233-64-6
•De Villiers, Victor Taylor. Devilliers & Taylor On Point And Figure Charting, ISBN 0-273-64975-2
•Dorsey, Thomas J. Point and Figure Charting - The Essential Application for Forecasting and Tracking Market
Prices, 2nd Edition, ISBN 0-471-41292-9 - PDF [3]
•Dorsey, Thomas J. Tom Dorsey's Trading Tips - A Playbook for Stock Market Success, ISBN 1-57660-077-7
•Dorsey, Thomas J. Sicher anlegen mit Point und Figure. Klare Signale mit einfachen Methoden, ISBN
3-932114-38-8
•Du Plessis, Jeremy The Definitive Guide to Point and Figure,A Comprehensive Guide to the Theory and Practical
Use of the Point and Figure Charting Method, ISBN 1-897597-63-0
•Hauschild, K. and Winkelmann, M. (1985), Kapitalmarketeffizienz und Point and Figure Analyse, Kredit Und
Kapital, 18.
•Kaufman, Perry J. (2005), New Trading Systems and Methods, Chapters 5 and 21, ISBN 978-0471268475
•LeBeau, Charles and Lucas, David (1991), Technical Traders Guide to Computer Analysis of the Futures
Markets, ISBN 978-1556234682
•Rivalland, Marc Marc Rivalland on Swing Trading, 214 pages, paperback, ISBN 1-897597-19-3
•Stottner, R. (1990), - P&F-Filteranalyse, Averaging-Strategie und Buy&Hold-Anlageregel, Jahrb. f. Nationalok.
u. Stat., 207.
•Weber Heinrich and Kermit Zieg. The Complete Guide to Point and Figure Charting: The New Science of an Old
Art, ISBN 1-897597-28-2
•Zieg, Kermit Zieg. Point and Figure Commodity and Stock Trading Techniques Also Options Bonds International
Currency Indices, ISBN 0-934380-38-4Point and figure chart 45
References
[1]http:/ / books. google. com/ books?id=EPMpAAAAYAAJ& printsec=frontcover& source=gbs_atb#v=onepage& q& f=false
[2]http:/ / caseyresearch. com/ dImage. php?i=1232818310-SharpChartv05. ServletDriver. png
[3]http:/ / www. stockvision. org/ books/ Thomas_Dorsey-Point_and_Figure_Charting-EN. pdf
Kagi chart
The Kagi chart is a chart used for tracking price movements and to make decisions on purchasing stock. It differs
from traditional stock charts, such as the Candlestick chart by being mostly independent of time. This feature aids in
producing a chart that reduces random noise.
Due to its effectiveness in showing a clear path of price movements, the Kagi chart is one of the various charts that
investors use to make better decisions about stocks. The most important benefit of this chart is that it is independent
of time and change of direction occurs only when a specific amount is reached.
The Kagi chart was originally developed in Japan during the 1870s when the Japanese stock market started
trading.[1] It was used for tracking the price movement of rice and found use in determining the general levels of
supply and demand for certain assets.
Construction
Kagi charts look similar to swing charts and do not have a time axis.[2] A Kagi chart is created with a series of
vertical lines connected by short horizontal lines. The thickness and direction of the lines is based on the price of the
underlying stock or asset, as follows:
•The thickness of the line changes when the price reaches the high or low of the previous vertical line.
•The direction of the line changes when the price reaches a preset reversal amount, which is usually set at 4%.
When a direction change occurs, a short horizontal line is drawn between the lines of opposite direction.
Alternatively, thin and thick lines can be replaced with lines of different colours, such as the green/red example in
the figure.
Changes in line thickness are used to generate transaction signals. Buy signals are generated when the Kagi line goes
from thin to thick and sell signals are generated when the line turns from thick to thin.Kagi chart 46
How to plot a Kagi chart
1.Find the starting point. The starting point is generally considered the first closing price. From this point forward,
you compare each day's closing price with the starting price.
2.Draw a thin vertical line from the starting price to each day's closing price, while the trend does not reverse.
3.If a day's closing price moves in the opposite direction to the trend by more than the reversal amount, draw a
short horizontal line and a new vertical line, beginning from the horizontal line to the new closing price.
4.If the price on a day is greater than or equal to the previous high, change to a thick line and continue the vertical
line. If the price on that day is less than or equal to the previous low, then change to a thin line.
References
[1]Kagi Chart, Investopedia (http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ terms/ k/ kagichart. asp). Retrieved 16 Oct 2008.
[2]A Look At Kagi Charts, Investopedia (http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ articles/ trading/ 07/ kagi_chart. asp). Retrieved 16 Oct 2008.
External links
•Kagi Chart, Investopedia (http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ terms/ k/ kagichart. asp)
•A Look At Kagi Charts, Investopedia (http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ articles/ trading/ 07/ kagi_chart. asp)47
PATTERNS: Chart Pattern
Chart pattern
A chart pattern is a pattern that is formed within a chart when prices are graphed. In stock and commodity markets
trading, chart pattern studies play a large role during technical analysis. When data is plotted there is usually a
pattern which naturally occurs and repeats over a period of time. Chart patterns are used as either reversal or
continuation signals.
Some people claim that by recognizing chart patterns they are able to predict future stock prices and profit by this
prediction; other people respond by quoting "past performance is no guarantee of future results" and argue that chart
patterns are merely illusions created by people's subconscious. Certain theories of economics hold that if there were
a way to predict future stock prices and profit by it then when enough people used these techniques they would
become ineffective and cease to be profitable. On the other hand, if you can predict what other people will predict
the market to do then that would be valuable information.
Patterns
Examples of "classical" chart patterns as popularized by Edwards and Magee and used widely by traders and
investors include:
•Head and shoulders
•Trend lines
•Cup and handle
•Double top and double bottom
•Triple top and triple bottom
•Broadening top
•Price channels
•Wedge pattern
•Triangle (technical analysis)
•Flag and pennant patterns
•Elite patterns
External links
•Chart Patterns for Institutional Portfolio Managers/Michael Lowrey/Rodney Fragodt [1]
References
[1]http:/ / www. mtresearchcorp. com/Head and shoulders (chart pattern) 48
Head and shoulders (chart pattern)
The Head and Shoulders formation is one of the most well known reversal patterns.
On the technical analysis chart, when a price trend is in the process of reversal either from a bullish or bearish trend,
a characteristic pattern takes shape and is recognized as reversal formation.
Formations
Head and Shoulders Top and Head and Shoulders Bottom is discussed below.
Head and shoulders top
Head and Shoulders Top
Head and Shoulders formation consists of a left
shoulder, a head, and a right shoulder and a line
drawn as the neckline. The left shoulder is formed at
the end of an extensive move during which volume is
noticeably high. After the peak of the left shoulder is
formed, there is a subsequent reaction and prices
slide down up to a certain extent which generally
occurs on low volume. The prices rally up to form
the head with normal or heavy volume and
subsequent reaction downward is accompanied with
lesser volume. The right shoulder is formed when
prices move up again but remain below the central
peak called the Head and fall down nearly equal to
the first valley between the left shoulder and the head
or at least below the peak of the left shoulder.
Volume is lesser in the right shoulder formation
compared to the left shoulder and the head formation.
A neckline is drawn across the bottoms of the left shoulder, the head and the right shoulder. When prices break
through this neckline and keep on falling after forming the right shoulder, it is the ultimate confirmation of the
completion of the Head and Shoulders Top formation. It is quite possible that prices pull back to touch the neckline
before continuing their declining trend.Head and shoulders (chart pattern) 49
Head and shoulders bottom
Head and Shoulders Bottom
This formation is simply the inverse of a Head and
Shoulders Top and often indicates a change in the
trend and the sentiment. The formation is upside
down in which volume pattern is different than a
Head and Shoulder Top. Prices move up from first
low with increase volume up to a level to complete
the left shoulder formation and then falls down to a
new low. It follows by a recovery move that is
marked by somewhat more volume than seen before
to complete the head formation. A corrective reaction
on low volume occurs to start formation of the right
shoulder and then a sharp move up that must be on
quite heavy volume breaks though the neckline.
Another difference between the Head and Shoulders
Top and Bottom is that the Top Formations are completed in a few weeks, whereas a Major Bottom (Left, right
shoulder or the head) usually takes a longer, and as observed, may prolong for a period of several months or
sometimes more than a year.
Importance of neckline
The drawn neckline of the pattern represents a support level, and assumption cannot be taken that the Head and
Shoulder formation is completed unless it is broken and such breakthrough may happen to be on more volume or
may not be. The breakthrough should not be observed carelessly. A serious situation can occur if such a break is
more than three to four percent.
When a stock drifts through the neckline on small volume, there may be a wave up, although it is not certain, but it is
observed, the rally normally does not cross the general level of the Neckline and before selling pressure increases,
the steep decline occurs and prices tumble with greater volume.
Characteristics
•Most of the time Head and Shoulders are not perfectly shaped. This formation is slightly tilted upward or
downward.
•One shoulder may appear to droop.
•On many chart patterns, any one of the two shoulders may appear broader than the other which is caused by the
time involved in the formation of the valleys.
•The neckline may not be perfectly horizontal; it may be ascending or descending.
•If the neckline is ascending then the only qualification of the formation lies in the fact that the lowest point of the
right shoulder must be noticeably lower than the peak of the left shoulder.
Usage as a tool
Head and Shoulders is an extremely useful tool after its confirmation to estimate and measure the minimum probable
extent of the subsequent move form the neckline. To find the distance of subsequent move, measure the distance
form the peak of the head to the neckline. Then measure the same distance down from the neckline to the point
where prices penetrate the neckline after the completion of the right shoulder. This gives the minimum objective of
how far prices can decline after the completion of this top formation.Head and shoulders (chart pattern) 50
In case, if the price advance preceding the Head and Shoulders top is not long, the subsequent price fall after its
completion may be small as well.
External links
•Analyzing Chart Patterns: Head And Shoulders [1] at investopedia.com
•Head and shoulders [2] at onlinetradingconcepts.com
References
[1]http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ university/ charts/ charts2. asp
[2]http:/ / www. onlinetradingconcepts. com/ TechnicalAnalysis/ ClassicCharting/ HeadShoulders. html
Cup and handle
The cup and handle formation (also called the cup with handle formation) is a bullish chart pattern that is defined
by a chart where a stock drops in value, then rises back up to the original value, then drops a small amount in value,
and then rises a small amount in value.
Important characteristics
•Trend: A cup and handle formation should follow an increase trend, ideally one that is only a few months old.
The older the increase trend, the less likely it is that the cup and handle will be an accurate indicator.
•Shape: In a cup and handle formation, the cup must always precede the handle. The cup should form a rounded
bowl shape, with an obvious bottom. A V-shaped bowl is said to be avoided. The cup should be fairly shallow,
and ideally should retrace about 30% to 50% of the previous increase.[1] The perfect pattern would have equal
highs on either side of the cup, but this is not always the case.
•Duration: The cup should last 1 to 6 months, while the handle should only last for 1 to 4 weeks.[1] These are only
approximate values, however; a cup may last anywhere from a few weeks to a few years.
•Volume: The volume of the stock should decrease along with the price during the cup and should increase rapidly
near the end of the handle when the price begins to rise.[1]
Significance for traders
A cup and handle formation is considered to be a bullish signal, and is usually followed by a sharp rise in value. A
rather accurate estimation of the expected price rise is found by measuring the price rise from the bottom of the cup
to the right side.[1] The reason for a price rise following a cup and handle formation is largely unknown. Likely
because many traders know about this signal and buy when they see it forming thus artificially creating the bullish
uptrend.
References
[1]Cup and handle at stockcharts.com (http:/ / stockcharts. com/ school/ doku.
php?id=chart_school:chart_analysis:chart_patterns:cup_with_handle)
External links
•Analyzing Chart Patterns: Cup And Handle (http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ university/ charts/ charts3. asp) at
investopedia.comDouble top and double bottom 51
Double top and double bottom
Double top and double bottom are reversal chart patterns observed in the technical analysis of financial trading
markets of stocks, commodities, currencies, and other assets.
Double top
Double top confirmation
The double top is a frequent price formation
at the end of a bull market. It appears as two
consecutive peaks of approximately the
same price on a price-versus-time chart of a
market. The two peaks are separated by a
minimum in price, a valley. The price level
of this minimum is called the neck line of
the formation. The formation is completed
and confirmed when the price falls below
the neck line, indicating that further price
decline is imminent or highly likely.
The double top pattern shows that demand is
outpacing supply (buyers predominate) up
to the first top, causing prices to rise. The
supply-demand balance then reverses;
supply outpaces demand (sellers predominate), causing prices to fall. After a price valley, buyers again predominate
and prices rise. If traders see that prices are not pushing past their level at the first top, sellers may again prevail,
lowering prices and causing a double top to form. It is generally regarded as a bearish signal if prices drop below the
neck line.
The time between the two peaks is also a determining factor for the existence of a double top pattern. If the tops
appear at the same level but are very close in time, then the probability is high that they are part of the consolidation
and the trend will resume.
Volume is another indicator for interpreting this formation. Price reaches the first peak on increased volume then
falls down the valley with low volume. Another attempt on the rally up to the second peak should be on a lower
volume.Double top and double bottom 52
Double bottom
Double bottom confirmation
A double bottom is the end formation in a
declining market. It is identical to the double
top, except for the inverse relationship in
price. The pattern is formed by two price
minima separated by local peak defining the
neck line.
Most of the rules that are associated with
double top formation also apply to the
double bottom pattern.
Volume should show a marked increase on
the rally up while prices are flat at the
second bottom.
External links
•Analyzing Chart Patterns: Double Top And Double Bottom [1] at investopedia.com
References
[1]http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ university/ charts/ charts4. asp
Triple top and triple bottom
Triple top and triple bottom are reversal chart patterns used in the technical analysis of stocks, commodites,
currencies, and other assets.
Triple top
Triple Top confirmation
Formation
The formation of triple tops is rarer than that of double tops in the rising market
trend. The volume is usually low during the second rally up and lesser during the
formation of the third top. The peaks may not necessarily be spaced evenly like
those which constitute a Double top. The intervening valleys may not bottom out at
exactly the same level, i.e. either the first or second may be lower. The triple top is
confirmed when the price decline from the third top falls below the bottom of the
lowest valley between the three peaks.
Selling StrategyTriple top and triple bottom 53
Opportunity
There are several different trading strategies that can be employed to take advantage
of this formation. Of course, first and second peaks are perfect point to place sell
orders. After the Double top has been confirmed and if prices are moving up again
with low volume, it is an opportune point to sell. One can sell short with a stop
(calculated loss) above the highest peak of the Double Top. The next opportune
point to sell would be after a Triple top has formed and a fourth top is being formed
at the lower level.
Notes Observation shows that it is rare to see four tops or bottoms at equal levels. In
case prices continue to rally up to the level of the three previous tops, there is a good
chance that they will rally up higher. If they come down to the same level a fourth
time, they usually decline.
Triple bottom
Triple Bottom
Most of the rules that are applied in the formation of the Triple top can be reversed
in the formation of triple bottom. As far as volume is concerned, the third low
bottom should be on low volume and the rally up from that bottom should show a
marked increase in activity.
The formation of Triple Bottom occurs during the period of accumulation.
External links
•Analyzing Chart Patterns: Triple Tops And Bottoms [1] at investopedia.com
References
[1]http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ university/ charts/ charts9. aspBroadening top 54
Broadening top
Broadening top is technical analysis chart pattern describing trends of stocks, commodities, currencies, and other
assets.
Point of Formation
Broadening Top formation appears much more frequently at tops than at bottoms. It is a difficult formation to trade
in. Its formation usually has bearish implications.
Role of Big Players
It is a common saying that smart money is out of market in such formation and market is out of control. In its
formation, most of the selling is completed in the early stage by big players and the participation is from general
public in the later stage.
Price & Volume
Price keeps on swinging unpredictably and one can't be sure where the next swing will end. Regarding the shares
volume, it is very irregular and leaves no clue to the direction of the next move.
How Broadening Top is formed
In the broadening top formation five minor reversals are followed by a substantial decline.
Five minor reversals a-b-c-d-e
In the figure above, price of the share reverses five times, reversal point d is made at a lower point than reversal
point b and reversal point c and e occur successively higher than reversal point a.
One can't be sure of the trend unless price breaks down the lower of the two points (b & d) and keeps on
falling. In the figure below, Broading Top is confirmed.Broadening top 55
Broadening Top confirmation
Other Chart Patterns
•Candlestick pattern
•Double Top & Double Bottom
•Gaps (Technical analysis)
•Head and Shoulders Top & Bottom
•The Island Reversal
•Triple Top & Triple Bottom
•Wedge Formations
Price channels
A price channel is a pair of parallel trend lines that form a chart pattern for a stock or commodity.[1] Channels may
be horizontal, ascending or descending. When prices pass through and stay through a trendline representing support
or resistance, the trend is said to be broken and there is a "breakout".[2]
References
[1]Murphy, pages 80-85
[2]Murphy, pages 400-401
•John J. Murphy, Technical Analysis of the Financial Markets, New York Institute of Finance, 1999, ISBN
0-7352-0066-1Wedge pattern 56
Wedge pattern
The wedge pattern is a commonly found pattern in the price charts of financially traded assets (stocks, bonds,
futures, etc.). The pattern is characterized by a contracting range in prices coupled with an upward trend in prices
(known as a rising wedge) or a downward trend in prices (known as a falling wedge).
A wedge pattern is considered to be a temporary halt of primary trend. It is a type of formation in which trading
activities are confined within converging straight lines which form a pattern. It should take about 3 to 4 weeks to
complete the wedge. This pattern has a rising or falling slant pointing in the same direction. It differs from the
triangle in the sense that both boundary lines either slope up or down. Price breaking out point creates another
difference from the triangle. Falling and rising wedges are a small part of intermediate or major trend. As they are
reserved for minor trends, they are not considered to be major patterns. Once that basic or primary trend resumes
itself, the wedge pattern looses its effectiveness as a technical indicator.
Falling wedge
Falling wedge
The falling wedge pattern is characterized by a chart pattern which
forms when the market makes lower lows and lower highs with a
contracting range. When this pattern is found in a downward trend,
it is considered a reversal pattern, as the contraction of the range
indicates the downtrend is losing steam. When this pattern is found
in an uptrend, it is considered a bullish pattern, as the market range
becomes narrower into the correction, indicating that the
downward trend is losing strength and the resumption of the
uptrend is in the making.
In a falling wedge, both boundary lines slant down from left to
right. The upper descends at a steeper angle than the lower line.
Volume keeps on diminishing and trading activity slows down due
to narrowing prices. There comes the breaking point, and trading
activity after the breakout differs. Once prices move out of the
specific boundary lines of a falling wedge, they are more likely to
move sideways and saucer-out before they resume the basic trend.Wedge pattern 57
Rising wedge
Rising wedge
The rising wedge pattern is characterized by a chart pattern which
forms when the market makes higher highs and higher lows with a
contracting range. When this pattern is found in an uptrend, it is
considered a reversal pattern, as the contraction of the range
indicates that the uptrend is losing strength. When this pattern is
found in a downtrend, it is considered a bearish pattern, as the
market range becomes narrower into the correction, indicating that
the correction is losing strength, and that the resumption of the
downtrend is in the making.
In a rising wedge, both boundary lines slant up from left to right.
Although both lines point in the same direction, the lower line
rises at a steeper angle then the upper one. Prices usually decline
after breaking through the lower boundary line. As far as volumes
are concerned, they keep on declining with each new price
advance or wave up, indicating that the demand is weakening at
the higher price level. A rising wedge is more reliable when found in a bearish market. In a bullish trend what seems
to be a Rising Wedge may actually be a Flag or a Pennant (stepbrother of a wedge) requiring about 4 weeks to
complete.
External links
•Analyzing Chart Patterns: The Wedge [1] at investopedia.com
References
[1]http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ university/ charts/ charts7. aspTriangle (chart pattern) 58
Triangle (chart pattern)
Triangles are a commonly found in the price charts of financially traded assets (stocks, bonds, futures, etc). The
pattern derives its name from the fact that it is characterized by a contraction in price range and converging
trendlines, thus giving it a triangular shape.
Triangle Patterns can be broken down into three categories: the ascending triangle, the descending triangle, and the
symmetrical triangle. While the shape of the triangle is significant, of more importance is the direction that the
market moves when it breaks out of the triangle. Lastly, while triangles can sometimes be reversal
patterns—meaning a reversal of the prior trend—they are normally seen as continuation patterns (meaning a
continuation of the prior trend).
The Ascending Triangle
The ascending triangle is formed when the market makes higher lows and the same level highs. These patterns are
normally seen in an uptrend and viewed as a continuation pattern as buying demand gain more and more control,
running up to the top resistance line of the pattern. While you normally will see this pattern form in an uptrend, if
you do see it in a downtrend it should be paid attention to as it can act as a powerful reversal signal.
The chart below offers an example of an ascending triangle.
Triangle (chart pattern) 59
The Descending Triangle
The descending triangle is formed when the market makes lower highs and the same level lows. These patterns are
normally seen in a downtrend and viewed as a continuation pattern as the bears gain more and more control running
down to the bottom support line of the pattern. While you normally will see this pattern form in a downtrend, if you
do see it in an uptrend it should be paid attention to as it can act as a powerful reversal signal.
The image below illustrates.
The Symmetrical Triangle
The symmetrical triangle is formed when the market makes lower highs and higher lows and is commonly associated
with directionless markets as the contraction of the market range indicates that neither the bulls nor the bears are in
control. If this pattern forms in an uptrend then it is considered a continuation pattern if the market breaks out to the
upside and a reversal pattern if the market breaks to the downside. Similarly if the pattern forms in a downtrend it is
considered a continuation pattern if the market breaks out to the downside and a reversal pattern if the market breaks
to the upside.
The image below illustrates.Triangle (chart pattern) 60
Flag and pennant patterns
The flag and pennant patterns are commonly found patterns in the price charts of financially traded assets (stocks,
bonds, futures, etc). The patterns are characterized by a clear direction of the price trend, followed by a consolidation
and rangebound movement, which is then followed by a resumption of the trend.
Flag pattern
The flag pattern is encompassed by two parallel lines. These lines can be either flat or pointed in the opposite
direction of the primary market trend. The pole is then formed by a line which represents the primary trend in the
market. The pattern is seen as the market potentially just taking a “breather” after a big move before continuing its
primary trend. The chart below illustrates.Flag and pennant patterns 61
Flag and pennant patterns 62
Pennant pattern
The pennant pattern is identical to the flag pattern in its setup and implications; the only difference is that the
consolidation phase of a pennant pattern is characterized by converging trendlines rather than parallel trendlines. The
image below illustrates.
External links
•Analyzing Chart Patterns: Flags And Pennants [1] at investopedia.com
References
[1]http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ university/ charts/ charts6. aspThe Island Reversal 63
The Island Reversal
The Island Reversals
In general terms, The Island Reversal
can be defined as a compact trading
activity within a range of prices,
separated from the move proceeding it;
this separation is caused by an
Exhaustion Gap and the subsequent
move in the opposite direction occurs
as a result of a Breakaway Gap.
Formation
Close scrutiny of Island Reversal
formations shows that the Island
Reversal consists of an Exhaustion
Gap and the subsequent move is
followed by a Breakaway Gap.
Uncommonly, the Breakaway Gap that completes the Island is filled in a few days by a pull back as a result of the
reaction. The Island Reversal can occur at the peak or the reverse of Head and Shoulders formations.
For example, assume that the price in a rising trend closes at its high of $84.00 and opens at $91.00 the following
day and then does not fall below its opening. Near the end of the day, it moves up further and touches $97.00 but
closes at $96.00 however. Observation thus shows a gap of $7.00 which is not filled. On the following day market
price open at $94.00, touches high of $96.00 and closes at $90.00. A few days later or the very next day, market
price opens at $84.00 and closes at $83.00, keeping itself below the area of $91.00 and $84.00. All the trading above
$91.00 will appear on the Technical analysis chart to be isolated and is known as, "The Island Reversal."
Characteristics
•The occurrence of The Island Reversal is rather rare.
•It consists of a minor move.
•It is not, in itself of major significance.
•It can occur at the Top as well as at the Bottom.
•The Gaps at either end occur at almost the same price level.
•It has a compact trading activity that is separated from the subsequent move which is in the opposite direction.
•It is an extremely good indicator of a reversal of primary or intermediate trend.
•As soon as it appears, it indicates that an extreme change in the sentiment has occurred.
•High volume is expected in that compact trading area.
•The trading activity may last for only a single day or a couple of days. When this arrangement occurs for only a
single day, it is known as One Day Reversal.The Island Reversal 64
Caution
This can be compared with the scenario that on reaching an island, a boat will leave it immediately after unloading
some of its load. This entire process is very rapid. A crew member engaged in trading onshore if left behind in the
frenzy will be subject to mental stress on how to transport his bargained goods. Even if he manages to swim against
the waves of worries and reaches the boat along with his purchases, he shall incur losses by damage to the items.
Hence, caution should be exercised in taking a step on the island at top level with a bullish attitude.
Gap (chart pattern)
Sequence of Gaps
A gap is defined as an unfilled space
or interval. On a technical analysis
chart, a gap represents an area where
no trading takes place. On the Japanese
candlestick chart, a window is
interpreted as a gap.
In an upward trend, a gap is produced
when the highest price of one day is
lower than the lowest price of the
following day. Thus, in a downward
trend, a gap occurs when the lowest
price of any one day is higher than the
highest price of the next day.
For example, the price of a share
reaches a high of $30.00 on
Wednesday, and opens at $36.00 on
Thursday, falls down to $35.00 in the early hour, moves straight up again to $37.00, and no trading occurs in
between $30.00 and $35.00 area. This no-trading zone appears on the chart as a gap.
Gaps can play an important role when spotted before the beginning of a move.
Types of gaps
There are four different types of gaps, excluding the gap that occurs as a result of a stock going ex-dividend. Since
each type of gap has its own distinctive implication, it is very important to be able distinguish between such gaps.
•Breakway gap : It occurs when prices break away from an area of congestion. When the price is breaking away
from a triangle (Ascending or Descending) with a gap then it can be implied that change in sentiment is strong
and coming move will be powerful. One must keep an eye on the volume. If it is heavy after the gap is formed
then there is a good chance that market does not return to fill the gap. When the price is breaking away on a low
volume, there is a possibility that the gap will be filled before prices resume their trend.
•Common gap : It is also known as area gap, pattern gap or temporary gap. They tend to occur when trading is
bound between support and resistance level on a short span of time and market price is moving sideways. One can
also see them in price congestion area. Usually, the price moves back or goes up in order to fill the gaps in the
coming days. If the gap is filled, then they offer, not much in the way of forecasting significance.
•Exhaustion gap signals end of a move. These gaps are associated with a rapid, straight-line advance or decline. 
When they are formed at the top with heavy volume, there are significant chances that the market is exhaustedGap (chart pattern) 65
and reversal is ahead. A reversal day can easily differentiate between the Measuring gap and the Exhaustion gap.
•Measuring Gap : Also known as Runaway Gap, a Measuring gap is formed usually in the half way of a price
move. It is not associated with the congestion area, it is more likely to occur approximately in the middle of rapid
advance or decline. It can be used to measure how much further ahead a move will go.
Caution
It is quite possible that confusion between measuring gap and exhaustion gap can cause an investor to position
himself incorrectly and to miss significant gains during the last half of a major uptrend. Keeping an eye on the
volume can help to find the clue between measuring gap and exhaustion gap. Normally, noticeable heavy volume
accompanies the arrival of exhaustion gap.
Trading gaps for profit
Some market speculators "Fade" the gap on the opening of a market. This means for example that if the S&P 500
closed the day before at 1150 (16:15 EST) and opens today at 1160 (09:30 EST), they will short the market
expecting this "upgap" to close. A "downgap" would mean today opens at for example 1140, and the speculator buys
the market at the open expecting the "downgap to close". The probability of this happening on any given day is
around 70%, depending on which market you look at. Once the probability of "gap fill" on any given day or
technical position is established, then the best setups for this trade can be identified. Some days have such a low
probability of the gap filling that speculators will trade in the direction of the gap.
Examples
Measuring gap  Gap (chart pattern) 66
Exhaustion gap[1]
Common gaps[2]
Breakaway gap[3]Gap (chart pattern) 67
References
[1]Exhaustion gap - investopedia.com (http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ terms/ e/ exhaustiongap. asp)
[2]Common gap - investopedia.com (http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ terms/ c/ commongap. asp)
[3]Breakaway gap - investopedia.com (http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ terms/ b/ breakawaygap. asp)
External links
•Analyzing Chart Patterns: Gaps (http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ university/ charts/ charts8. asp) at
investopedia.com
•Playing The Gap (http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ articles/ trading/ 05/ playinggaps. asp) at investopedia.com
•Windows (Gaps) (http:/ / www. onlinetradingconcepts. com/ TechnicalAnalysis/ Candlesticks/ Windows. html) at
onlinetradingconcepts.com68
PATTERNS: Candlestick pattern
Candlestick pattern
This page provides brief introduction to the patterns of Japanese Candlesticks Chart. Please note that candlestick
pattern recognition is subjective and programs that are used for charting technique must rely on predefined rules.
History
It is said that Japanese used technical analysis to trade rice in the 17th century. But according to Steve Nison,
candlestick charting came later and probably began sometime after 1850. Much of the credit for candlestick charting
goes to Munehisa Homma who was a rice trader from Sakata.
Formation of candlestick
Candlestick is formed with the help of opening, high, low and closing price of the day. If the opening price is above
the closing price then a filled candlestick is drawn. Normally, black colour is used for filling the candle. If the
closing price is above the opening price, then a hollow candlestick (normally displayed in white with black border) is
drawn. The filled or the hollow portion of the candle is known as body or real body which can be long, normal or
short with proportionate to the line above or below it. The lines (long or short) above and below the body or real
body represent the high or low price range and these lines are known as shadows, tails or wicks. For the particular
day, the highest price is declared by the top of the upper shadow and the lowest price is marked by the bottom of the
lower tail. Please note that the body may or may not have shadows, tails or wicks.
Simple patterns
It has an unusually black long body with a wide range between high and low. Prices open near the high and close near
the low. It is considered as a bearish pattern.  Candlestick pattern 69
It has an unusually long white body with a wide range between high and low of the day. Prices open near the low and
close near the high. It is considered as a bullish pattern.  
It is formed when the opening price is higher than the closing price and is
considered as a bearish signal.  Candlestick pattern 70
It is formed when opening and closing prices are virtually the same. The length of shadows can vary. It is considered
that doji candlesticks are usually components of many candlestick pattern.
It is formed when the opening and the closing prices are at the highest of the day. If it has a longer lower shadow it
signals more bullish trend. When it appears at market bottom it is considered as a reversal signal.  Candlestick pattern 71
It is formed when the opening and closing prices are at the lowest of the day. If it has a longer upper shadow it signals
more bearish trend. When it appears at market top it is considered as a reversal signal.  
It consists of a Doji with very long upper and lower shadow. When it appears at market top it is
considered as a reversal signal.  Candlestick pattern 72
A black or a white candlestick that consists of a small body near the high with a little or no upper shadow and a long
lower tail. The lower tail should be two or three times the height of the body. It is considered as a bearish pattern
during an uptrend.  
A black or a white candlestick that consists of a small body near the high with a little or no upper shadow and a long
lower tail. It is considered as a bullish pattern during a downtrend.  Candlestick pattern 73
A black body is formed in an upside-down hammer position. It is considered as a bottom reversal signal that needs
confirmation on the next trading day.  
It consists of black or a white candlestick in an upside-down hammer position. It is considered as a bottom reversal
signal that needs confirmation on the next trading day.  Candlestick pattern 74
A black or a white candlestick is formed with a lower tail that has a length of 2/3 or more of the total range of the
candlestick. Normally, it is considered as a bullish signal when it appears around price support levels.  
A black or a white candlestick with a upper shadow that has a length of 2/3 or more of the total range of the
candlestick. Normally, It is considered as a bearish signal, when it appears around price resistance levels.  Candlestick pattern 75
A long or a normal candlestick (black or white) is formed with no shadow or tail. The high and the low is consisted of
the opening and the closing prices. It is considered as a continuation pattern.  
A black or a white candlestick is formed that has a small body, a long upper shadow and a little or no lower tail. It is
considered as a bearish pattern in an uptrend.  Candlestick pattern 76
A black or a white candlestick is formed with a small body. The size of shadows can vary. It is interpreted as a neutral
pattern but gains more importance when it is part of other formations.  
It is formed when the closing price is higher than the opening price and is
considered as a bullish signal.  Candlestick pattern 77
A black or a white candlestick is formed with no lower tail. It can be compared
with Inverted Hammer.  
A black or a white candlestick is formed with no upper shadow. It can be
compared with a hammer.  Candlestick pattern 78
Complex patterns
It consists of an unusually large white body followed by a small back body (contained within large white body). It is
considered as a bearish pattern when preceded by an uptrend.  
It has a large white body followed by a Doji. It is considered as a reversal signal
when it appears at the top.  Candlestick pattern 79
It has a long black body followed by three small bodies (normally white) and a long black body. The three white
bodies are contained within the range of first black body. This is considered as a bearish continuation pattern.  
It consists of a long white body followed by three small bodies (normally black) and a long white body. The three
black bodies are contained within the range of first white body. This is considered as a bullish continuation pattern  Candlestick pattern 80
It consists of an unusually large black body followed by a small white body (contained within large black body). It is
considered as a bullish pattern when preceded by an uptrend.  
It has a large black body followed by a Doji. It is considered as a reversal signal when it
appears at the bottom.  Candlestick pattern 81
It consists of a long white candlestick followed by a black candlestick that opens above the high of the white
candlestick and closes well into the body of the white candlestick. It is considered as a bearish reversal signal during
an uptrend.  
It consists of a small while body that is contained within the followed large black candlestick. When it appears at top it
is considered as a major reversal signal.  Candlestick pattern 82
It consists of a small black body that is contained within the followed large white candlestick. When it appears at
bottom it is interpreted as a major reversal signal.  
It consists of three candlesticks. First is a large white body candlestick followed by a Doji that gap above the white
body. The third candlestick is a black body that closes well into the white body. When it appears at the top it is
considered as a reversal signal. It signals more bearish trend than the evening star pattern because of the doji that has
appeared between the two bodies.  Candlestick pattern 83
It consists of a large white body candlestick followed by a small body candlestick (black or white) that gaps above the
previous. The third is a black body candlestick that closes well within the large white body. It is considered as a
reversal signal when it appears at top level.  
A window (gap) is created when the high of the second candlestick is below the low of the preceding candlestick. It is
considered that the window should be filled with a probable resistance.  Candlestick pattern 84
It consists of a large black body candlestick followed by a Doji that occurred below the preceding candlestick. On the
following day, a third white body candlestick is formed that closed well into the black body candlestick which
appeared before the Doji. It is considered as a major reversal signal that is more bullish than the regular morning star
pattern because of the existence of the Doji.  
It consists of a large black body candlestick followed by a small body (black or white) that occurred below the large
black body candlestick. On the following day, a third white body candlestick is formed that closed well into the black
body candlestick. It is considered as a major reversal signal when it appears at bottom.  Candlestick pattern 85
In a downtrend, it consists of a black candlestick followed by a small body white candlestick with its close near the
low of the preceding black candlestick. It is considered as a bearish pattern when the low of the white candlestick is
penetrated.  
In a downtrend, a white candlestick is followed by a black candlestick with the preceding opening price. In an uptrend,
a black candlestick is followed by a white candlestick with the preceding opening price. It is considered as a
continuation pattern that the trend should resume.  Candlestick pattern 86
It consists of three long black candlesticks with consecutively lower closes. The closing prices are near to or at their
lows. When it appears at top it is considered as a top reversal signal.  
It consists of three long white candlesticks with consecutively higher closes. The closing prices are near to or at their
highs. When it appears at bottom it is interpreted as a bottom reversal signal.  Candlestick pattern 87
It consists of two or more candlesticks with matching bottoms. The candlesticks may or may not be consecutive and
the sizes or the colours can vary. It is considered as a minor reversal signal that becomes more important when the
candlesticks form another pattern.  
It consists of two or more candlesticks with matching tops. The candlesticks may or may not be consecutive and the
sizes or the colours can vary. It is considered as a minor reversal signal that becomes more important when the
candlesticks form another pattern.  Candlestick pattern 88
It consists of a black or a white candlestick followed by a Doji that gap above or below these. It is considered as a
reversal signal with confirmation during the next trading day.  
It consists of a black candlestick followed by a white candlestick that opens lower than the low of preceding but closes
more than halfway into black body candlestick. It is considered as reversal signal when it appears at bottom.  Candlestick pattern 89
A window (gap) is created when the low of the second candlestick is above the high of the preceding candlestick. It is
considered that the window should provide support to the selling pressure.  
See also
•A brief introduction of the terms used in acquisitions, mergers and takovers
•The Island Reversal
Doji
The doji is a commonly found pattern in a candlestick chart of financially traded assets (stocks, bonds, futures, etc).
It is characterized by being small in length—meaning a small trading range—with an opening and closing price that
are virtually equal[1] .
The doji represents indecision in the market. A doji is not as significant if the market is not clearly trending, as
non-trending markets are inherently indicative of indecision. If the doji forms in an uptrend or downtrend, this is
normally seen as significant, as it is a signal that the buyers are losing conviction when formed in an uptrend and a
signal that sellers are losing conviction if seen in a downtrend.Doji 90
Types of Doji
Neutral[2] : Dojis form when the opening and closing prices are virtually equal. Alone,
dojis are neutral patterns.
Long-Legged[3] : This doji reflects a great amount of indecision about the future direction
of the underlying asset.
Doji 91
Gravestone[4] : The long upper shadow suggests that the direction of the trend may be
nearing a major turning point.
Dragonfly[5] : The long lower shadow suggests that the direction of the trend may be
nearing a major turning point.
References
[1]Doji - stockcharts.com (http:/ / stockcharts. com/ school/ doku. php?id=chart_school:chart_analysis:introduction_to_candlesticks#doji)
[2]Neutral Doji - investopedia.com (http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ terms/ d/ doji. asp)
[3]Long-Legged Doji - investopedia.com (http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ terms/ l/ long-legged-doji. asp)
[4]Gravestone Doji - investopedia.com (http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ terms/ g/ gravestone-doji. asp)
[5]Dragonfly Doji - investopedia.com (http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ terms/ d/ dragonfly-doji. asp)
See also
•Candlestick chart
•Harami cross
•Doji starHammer (candlestick pattern) 92
Hammer (candlestick pattern)
Hammers are found in downtrends
A hammer is a type of bullish reversal candlestick pattern, made up of just one candle, found in price charts of
financial assets. The candle looks like a hammer, as it has a long lower wick and a short body at the top of the
candlestick with little or no upper wick. In order for a candle to be a valid hammer most traders say the lower wick
must be two times greater than the size of the body portion of the candle, and the body of the candle must be at the
upper end of the trading range.
When you see the hammer form in a downtrend this is a sign of a potential reversal in the market as the long lower
wick represents a period of trading where the sellers were initially in control but the buyers were able to reverse that
control and drive prices back up to close near the high for the day, thus the short body at the top of the candle.
After seeing this chart pattern form in the market most traders will wait for the next period to open higher than the
close of the previous period to confirm that the buyers are actually in control.
Two additional things that traders will look for to place more significance on the pattern are a long lower wick and
an increase in volume for the time period that formed the hammer.
External links
•Hammer pattern [1] at onlinetradingconcepts.com
•Bullish Hammer [2] at candlesticker.com
•Hammer definition [3] at investopedia.com
References
[1]http:/ / www. onlinetradingconcepts. com/ TechnicalAnalysis/ Candlesticks/ Hammer. html
[2]http:/ / www. candlesticker. com/ Cs18. asp
[3]http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ terms/ h/ hammer. aspHanging man (candlestick pattern) 93
Hanging man (candlestick pattern)
Hanging man patterns are found in uptrends
A hanging man is a type of bearish reversal pattern, made up of just one candle, found in price charts of financial
assets. It has a long lower wick and a short body at the top of the candlestick with little or no upper wick. In order for
a candle to be a valid hanging man most traders say the lower wick must be two times greater than the size of the
body portion of the candle, and the body of the candle must be at the upper end of the trading range.
External links
•Hanging man pattern [1] at onlinetradingconcepts.com
•Bearish Hanging man [2] at candlesticker.com
•Hanging man definition [3] at investopedia.com
References
[1]http:/ / www. onlinetradingconcepts. com/ TechnicalAnalysis/ Candlesticks/ HangingMan. html
[2]http:/ / www. candlesticker. com/ Cs26. asp
[3]http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ terms/ h/ hangingman. aspInverted hammer 94
Inverted hammer
The Inverted Hammer is a type of bullish reversal pattern. As its name implies, the inverted Hammer looks like an
upside down version of the hammer candlestick pattern. Like the hammer candlestick pattern, the Inverted Hammer
consists of one candle and when found in a downtrend is considered a potential reversal pattern.
The pattern is made up of a candle with a small lower body and a long upper wick which is at least two times as
large as the short lower body. The body of the candle should be at the low end of the trading range and there should
be little or no lower wick in the candle.
The long upper wick of the candlestick pattern indicates that the buyers drove prices up at some point during the
period in which the candle was formed but encountered selling pressure which drove prices back down for the period
to close near to where they opened. As this occurred in an uptrend the selling pressure is seen as a potential reversal
sign. When encountering this pattern traders will look for a lower open on the next period before considering the
pattern valid and potentially including it in their trading strategy
External links
•Inverted hammer [1] at onlinetradingconcepts.com
References
[1]http:/ / www. onlinetradingconcepts. com/ TechnicalAnalysis/ Candlesticks/ InvertedHammer. html
Shooting star (candlestick pattern)
Shooting star patterns are found in uptrends
The shooting star is a type of bearish reversal pattern. The Shooting Star looks exactly the same as the Inverted
hammer, but instead of being found in a downtrend it is found in an uptrend and thus has different implications.
Like the Inverted hammer it is made up of a candle with a small lower body, little or no lower wick, and a long upper
wick that is at least two times the size of the lower body.
The long upper wick of the candlestick pattern indicates that the buyers drove prices up at some point during the
period in which the candle was formed but encountered selling pressure which drove prices back down for the period
to close near to where they opened. As this occurred in an uptrend the selling pressure is seen as a potential reversal
sign. When encountering this pattern traders will look for a lower open on the next period before considering the
pattern valid and potentially including it in their trading strategy.Shooting star (candlestick pattern) 95
As with the Inverted hammer most traders will see a longer wick as a sign of a greater potential reversal and like to
see an increase in volume on the day the Shooting Star forms.
External links
•Shooting star pattern [1] at onlinetradingconcepts.com
•Bearish Shooting star [2] at candlesticker.com
•Shooting star definition [3] at investopedia.com
References
[1]http:/ / www. onlinetradingconcepts. com/ TechnicalAnalysis/ Candlesticks/ ShootingStar. html
[2]http:/ / www. candlesticker. com/ Cs42. asp
[3]http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ terms/ s/ shootingstar. asp
Marubozu
Marubozu is the name of Japanese candlesticks formation used in technical analysis to indicate a stock has traded
strongly in one direction throughout the session and closed at its high or low price of the day. A marubozu candle is
represented only by a body; it has no wicks or shadows extending from the top or bottom of the candle. A white
marubozu candle has a long white body and is formed when the open equals the low and the close equals the high.
The white marubozu candle indicates that buyers controlled the price of the stock from the opening bell to the close
of the day, and is considered very bullish.
A black marubozu candle has a long black body and is formed when the open equals the high and the close equals
the low. A black marubozu indicates that sellers controlled the price from the opening bell to the close of the day,
and is considered very bearish.
Examples
White
MarubozuMarubozu 96
Black
Marubozu
Spinning top (candlestick pattern)
Spinning top is a Japanese candlesticks pattern with a short body found in the middle of two long wicks. A spinning
top is indicative of a situation where neither the buyers nor the sellers have won for that time period, as the market
has closed relatively unchanged from where it opened; the market is indecisive regarding its trend. The upper and
lower long wicks, however, tell us that both the buyers and the sellers had the upper hand at some point during the
time period the candle represents. When a spinning top forms after a run up or run down in the market, it can be an
indication of a pending reversal, as the indecision in the market is representative of the buyers losing momentum
when this occurs after an uptrend and the sellers losing momentum after a downtrend.
Examples
Spinning
WhiteSpinning top (candlestick pattern) 97
Spinning
Black
Three white soldiers
Three white soldiers is a candlestick chart pattern in
the financial markets. It unfolds across three trading
sessions and suggests a strong price reversal from a
bear market to a bull market. The pattern consists of
three long candlesticks that trend upward like a
staircase; each should open above the previous day's
open, ideally in the middle price range of that previous
day. Each candlestick should also close progressively
upward to establish a new near-term high.[1]
The three white soldiers help to confirm that a bear
market has ended and market sentiment has turned
positive. In Candlestick Charting Explained, technical
analyst Gregory L. Morris says "This type of price
action is very bullish and should never be ignored."[2]
This candlestick pattern has an opposite known as the
Three Black Crows, which shares the same attributes in
reverse.
Notes
[1]"Japanese Candlesticks" (http:/ / www. ejapanesecandles. com/ three_white_soldiers. php). . Retrieved 15 June 2010.
[2]Morris, Gregory L.; Litchfield, Ryan (2005). Candlestick Charting Explained (3rd ed.). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. p. 126.
ISBN 0-07-146154-X.Three white soldiers 98
References
•Candlestick Charting Explained by Gregory L. Morris. Published by McGraw-Hill. ISBN 0-07-146154-X
•Japanese Candlestick Charting Techniques by Steve Nison. Published by New York Institute of Finance. ISBN
0-7352-0181-1
External links
•Stock Charts - Glossary (http:/ / stockcharts. com/ school/ doku. php?id=chart_school:glossary_t)
•Investopedia - Dictionary (http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ terms/ t/ three_white_soldiers. asp)
•Prosticks - Chart Patterns (http:/ / www. prosticks. com/ education/ candlestick_patterns/ three_white_soldiers.
php)
Three Black Crows
Three black crows is a term used by stock market
analyists to describe a market downturn. It appears on a
candlestick chart in the financial markets. It unfolds
across three trading sessions, and consists of three long
candlesticks that trend downward like a staircase. Each
candle should open below the previous day's open,
ideally in the middle price range of that previous day.
Each candlestick should also close progressively
downward to establish a new near-term low. The
pattern indicates a strong price reversal from a bull
market to a bear market.[1]
The three black crows help to confirm that a bull
market has ended and market sentiment has turned
negative. In Japanese Candlestick Charting
Techniques, technical analyst Steve Nison says "The
three black crows would likely be useful for
longer-term traders."[2]
This candlestick pattern has a counterpart known as the
Three white soldiers, whose attributes help identify a
bullish reversal or market upswing.
References
[1]"Stock market investing 101 - Simplified utilizing candlestick signals" (http:/ / www. candlestickforum. com/ PPF/ Parameters/ 16_597_/
candlestick. asp). . Retrieved 16 June 2010.
[2]Nison, Steve (2001). Candlestick Charting Explained (2nd ed.). Paramus, New Jersey: New York Institute of Finance. p. 97.
ISBN 0-7352-0181-1.
•Japanese Candlestick Charting Techniques by Steve Nison. Published by New York Institute of Finance. ISBN
0-7352-0181-1
•Candlestick Charting Explained by Gregory L. Morris. Published by McGraw-Hill. ISBN 0-07-146154-XThree Black Crows 99
External links
•Stock Charts - Glossary (http:/ / stockcharts. com/ school/ doku. php?id=chart_school:glossary_t)
•Investopedia - Dictionary (http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ terms/ t/ three_black_crows. asp)
•Prosticks - Chart Patterns (http:/ / www. prosticks. com/ education/ candlestick_patterns/ three_black_crows. php)
Morning star (candlestick pattern)
Illustration of the morningstar pattern
The Morning Star is a pattern seen in a
candlestick chart, a type of chart used by
stock analysts to describe and predict price
movements of a security, derivative, or
currency over time.
Description
The pattern is made up of three candles:
normally a long bearish candle, followed by
a short bullish or bearish doji, which is then
followed by a long bullish candle. In order
to have a valid Morning Star formation,
most traders will look for the top of the third candle to be at least half way up the body of the first candle in the
pattern. Black candles indicate falling prices, and white candles indicate rising prices.
Interpretation
When found in a downtrend, this pattern can be an indication that a reversal in the price trend is going to take place.
What the pattern represents from a supply and demand point of view is a lot of selling in the period which forms the
first black candle; then, a period of lower trading but with a reduced range, which indicates indecision in the market;
this forms the second candle. This is followed by a large white candle, representing buyers taking control of the
market. As the Morning Star is a three-candle pattern, traders oftentimes will not wait for confirmation from a fourth
candle before buying the stock. High volumes on the third trading day confirm the pattern. Traders will look at the
size of the candles for an indication of the size of the potential reversal. The larger the white and black candle, and
the higher the white candle moves in relation to the black candle, the larger the potential reversal.
The chart below illustrates.Morning star (candlestick pattern) 100
The Morning Star pattern is circled. Note the high trading volumes on the third day.
The opposite occurring at the top of an uptrend is called an evening star.
Hikkake Pattern
The Hikkake Pattern (also known simply as Hikkake or an inside day false breakout), is a technical analysis
pattern used for determining market turning-points and continuations. It is a simple pattern that can be observed in
market price data, using traditional bar charts, or Japanese candlestick charts.
Description
The pattern consists of a measurable period of rest and volatility contraction in the market, followed by a relatively
brief price move that encourages unsuspecting traders and investors to adopt a false assumption regarding the likely
future direction of price. The pattern, once formed, yields its own set of trading parameters for the time and price of
market entry, the dollar risk amount (i.e., where to place protective stops), and the expected profit target. The pattern
is not meant as a stand alone "system" for market speculation, but rather as an ancillary technique to traditional
technical and fundamental market analysis methods.
The pattern is recognised in two variants, one bearish and one bullish. In both variants, the first bar of the pattern is
an inside bar (i.e., one which has both a higher low and a lower high, compared with the previous bar). This is then
followed by either a bar with both higher low and higher high for the bearish variant, or with lower low and lower
high for the bullish variant. Before the pattern produces a trading signal it must be confirmed; this happens when the
price passes below the low of the first bar of the pattern (in the bearish variant) or above the high of the first bar (in
the bullish variant). Confirmation must occur within three periods of the last bar of the signal for the signal to be
considered valid.Hikkake Pattern 101
Origin
The hikkake pattern was first discovered and introduced to the financial community through a series of published
articles written by technical analyst.[1] The phrase "Hikkake" is a Japanese verb which means to "trick" or "ensnare."
Notable uses
Due to its popularity among institutional traders, the hikkake pattern has been adopted for use by INSTREAM,[2] the
Nordic power trading software company, in their E2 Energy Market Analysis Platform.
Growing interest in the hikkake pattern among traders and investors has also spawned attention from various book
authors. See: "Technical Analysis: The Complete Resource for Financial Market Technicians" by Charles D.
Kirkpatrick and Julie R. Dahlquist, and "Long/Short Market Dynamics: Trading Strategies for Today's Markets" by
Clive M. Corcoran.
References
[1]Daniel L. Chesler, CMT (http:/ / www. chesler. us)
[2]INTSTREAM (http:/ / www. intstream. com/ )
External links
•Trading False Moves with the Hikkake Pattern - PDF file (http:/ / www. chesler. us/ resources/ articles/
chesler0404. pdf)
•Quantifying Market Deception with The Hikkake Pattern - PDF file (http:/ / www. chesler. us/ resources/ articles/
TechAnalyst_Nov04. pdf)
•Noted technical analysis authority Thomas Bulkowski considers in detail the historical performance record of the
Hikkake pattern (http:/ / thepatternsite. com/ HikkakeBull. html)102
INDICATORS: Trend
Average Directional Index
The Average Directional Index (ADX) was developed in 1978 by J. Welles Wilder as an indicator of trend strength
in a series of prices of a financial instrument. ADX has become a widely used indicator for technical analysts, and is
provided as a standard in collections of indicators offered by various trading platforms.
Calculation
The ADX is a combination of two other indicators developed by Wilder, the positive directional indicator
(abbreviated +DI) and negative directional indicator (-DI). The ADX combines them and smooths the result with an
exponential moving average.
To calculate +DI and -DI, one needs price data consisting of high, low, and closing prices each period (typically each
day). One first calculates the Directional Movement (+DM and -DM):
UpMove = Today's High − Yesterday's High
DownMove = Yesterday's Low − Today's Low
if UpMove > DownMove and UpMove > 0, then +DM = UpMove, else +DM = 0
if DownMove > UpMove and DownMove > 0, then -DM = DownMove, else -DM = 0
After selecting the number of periods (Wilder used 14 days originally), +DI and -DI are:
+DI = 100 times exponential moving average of +DM divided by Average True Range
-DI = 100 times exponential moving average of -DM divided by Average True Range
The exponential moving average is calculated over the number of periods selected, and the average true range is an
exponential average of the true ranges. Then:
ADX = 100 times the exponential moving average of the Absolute value of (+DI − -DI) divided by (+DI +
-DI)
Variations of this calculation typically involve using different types of moving averages, such as a weighted moving
average or an adaptive moving average.
Interpretation
The ADX does not indicate trend direction, only trend strength. It is a lagging indicator; that is, a trend must have
established itself before the ADX will generate a signal that a trend is underway. ADX will range between 0 and
100. Generally, ADX readings below 20 indicate trend weakness, and readings above 40 indicate trend strength. An
extremely strong trend is indicated by readings above 50.
References
•J. Welles Wilder, Jr. (June 1978). New Concepts in Technical Trading Systems. Greensboro, NC: Trend Research.
ISBN 978-0894590276.Ichimoku Kinkō Hyō 103
Ichimoku Kinkō Hyō
Ichimoku Kinko Hyo (一目均衡表 Ichimoku Kinkō Hyō) usually just called ichimoku is a technical analysis
method that builds on candlestick charting to improve the accuracy of forecasted price moves. It was developed in
the late 1930s by Goichi Hosoda (細田悟一 Hosoda Goichi), a Japanese journalist who used to be known as
Ichimoku Sanjin, which can be translated as "What a man in the mountain sees". He spent thirty years perfecting the
technique before releasing his findings to the general public in the late 1960s.[1]
Ichimoku Kinko Hyo translates to 'one glance equilibrium chart' or 'instant look at the balance chart' and is
sometimes referred to as 'one glance cloud chart' based on the unique 'clouds' that feature in ichimoku charting.[2]
Ichimoku is a moving average-based trend identification system and because it contains more data points than
standard candlestick charts, provides a clearer picture of potential price action.[3] The main difference between how
moving averages are plotted in ichimoku as opposed to other methods is that ichimoku's lines are constructed using
the 50% point of the highs and lows as opposed to the candle's closing price.
Ichimoku factors in time as an additional element along with the price action, similar to William Delbert Gann's
trading ideas.
Popular in Japan, ichimoku is gaining traction in the west through proponents of its charting accuracy such as
Lincoln FX and Ichi360.
The key elements of the ichimoku chart
Tenkan-sen
Tenkan-sen (転換線) calculation: (highest high + lowest low)/2 for the last 9 periods.
It is primarily used as a signal line and a minor support/resistance line.
Kijun-sen
Kijun-sen (基準線) calculation: (highest high + lowest low)/2 for the past 26 periods.
This is a confirmation line, a support/resistance line, and can be used as a trailing stop line.
Senkou span A
Senkou (先行) span A calculation: (Tenkan-sen + kijun-sen)/2 plotted 26 periods ahead.
Also called leading span 1, this line forms one edge of the kumo, or cloud
Senkou span B
Senkou span B calculation: (highest high + lowest low)/2 calculated over the past 52 time periods and plotted 26
periods ahead.
Also called leading span 2, this line forms the other edge of the kumo.
Kumo
Kumo (雲, cloud) is the space between senkou span A and B. The cloud edges identify current and potential future
support and resistance points.Ichimoku Kinkō Hyō 104
Chikou span
Chikou (遅行) span calculation: today's closing price projected back 26 days on the chart.
Also called the lagging span it is used as a support/resistance aid.
References
[1]Kumotrader Ichimoku Wiki (http:/ / www. kumotrader. com/ ichimoku_wiki/ index. php?title=Main_Page)
[2]Example ichimoku chart showing all the elements (http:/ / www. lincolnfx. com/ forex-forecasts/ 2010/ 01/ 24/ ichimoku-elements-2/ )
[3]Ichimoku Cloud Filters Information Storm (http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ articles/ forex/ 06/ ichimoku. asp)
MACD
MACD (Moving Average Convergence/Divergence) is a technical analysis indicator created by Gerald Appel in the
late 1970s.[1] It is used to spot changes in the strength, direction, momentum, and duration of a trend in a stock's
price.
The MACD is a computation of the difference between two exponential moving averages (EMAs) of closing prices.
This difference is charted over time, alongside a moving average of the difference. The divergence between the two
is shown as a histogram or bar graph.
Exponential moving averages highlight recent changes in a stock's price. By comparing EMAs of different periods,
the MACD line illustrates changes in the trend of a stock. Then by comparing that difference to an average, an
analyst can chart subtle shifts in the stock's trend.
Since the MACD is based on moving averages, it is inherently a lagging indicator. As a metric of price trends, the
MACD is less useful for stocks that are not trending or are trading erratically.
Note that the term "MACD" is used both generally, to refer to the indicator as a whole, and specifically, to the
MACD line itself.
Basic components
MACD 12,26,9
The graph above shows a stock with a MACD indicator underneath it. The indicator shows a blue line, a red line,
and a histogram or bar chart which calculates the difference between the two lines. Values are calculated from the
price of the stock in the main part of the graph.
For the example above this means:
•MACD line (blue line): difference between the 12 and 26 days EMAs
•signal (red line): 9 day EMA of the blue line
•histogram (bar graph): difference between the blue and red lines
Mathematically:MACD 105
•MACD = EMA[fast,12] – EMA[slow, 26]
•signal = EMA[period,9] of MACD
•histogram = MACD – signal
The period for the moving averages on which an MACD is based can vary, but the most commonly used parameters
involve a faster EMA of 12 days, a slower EMA of 26 days, and the signal line as a 9 day EMA of the difference
between the two. It is written in the form, MACD(faster, slower, signal) or in this case, MACD(12,26,9).
Interpretation
Exponential moving averages highlight recent changes in a stock's price. By comparing EMAs of different lengths,
the MACD line gauges changes in the trend of a stock. By then comparing differences in the change of that line to an
average, an analyst can identify subtle shifts in the strength and direction of a stock's trend.
Traders recognize three meaningful signals generated by the MACD indicator.
When:
•the MACD line crosses the signal line
•the MACD line crosses zero
•there is a divergence between the MACD line and the price of the stock or between the histogram and the price of
the stock
Graphically this corresponds to:
•the blue line crossing the red line
•the blue line crossing the x-axis (the straight black line in the middle of the indicator)
•higher highs (lower lows) on the price graph but not on the blue line, or higher highs (lower lows) on the price
graph but not on the bar graph
And mathematically:
•MACD – signal = 0
•EMA[fast,12] – EMA[slow,26] = 0
•Sign (relative price extremumfinal – relative price extremuminitial) ≠ Sign (relative MACD extremumfinal –
MACD extremuminitial)
Signal line crossover
Signal line crossovers are the primary cues provided by the MACD. The standard interpretation is to buy when the
MACD line crosses up through the signal line, or sell when it crosses down through the signal line.
The upwards move is called a bullish crossover and the downwards move a bearish crossover. Respectively, they
indicate that the trend in the stock is about to accelerate in the direction of the crossover.
The histogram shows when a crossing occurs. Since the histogram is the difference between the MACD line and the
signal line, when they cross there is no difference between them.
The histogram can also help in visualizing when the two lines are approaching a crossover. Though it may show a
difference, the changing size of the difference can indicate the acceleration of a trend. A narrowing histogram
suggests a crossover may be approaching, and a widening histogram suggests that an ongoing trend is likely to get
even stronger.
While it is theoretically possible for a trend to increase indefinitely, under normal circumstances, even stocks
moving drastically will eventually slow down, lest they go up to infinity or down to nothing.MACD 106
Zero crossover
A crossing of the MACD line through zero happens when there is no difference between the fast and slow EMAs. A
move from positive to negative is bearish and from negative to positive, bullish. Zero crossovers provide evidence of
a change in the direction of a trend but less confirmation of its momentum than a signal line crossover.
Divergence
The third cue, divergence, refers to a discrepancy between the MACD line and the graph of the stock price. Positive
divergence between the MACD and price arises when price hits a new low, but the MACD doesn't. This is
interpreted as bullish, suggesting the downtrend may be nearly over. Negative divergence is when the stock price hits
a new high but the MACD does not. This is interpreted as bearish, suggesting that recent price increases will not
continue.
Divergence may also occur between the stock price and the histogram. If new high price levels are not confirmed by
new high histogram levels, it is considered bearish; alternately, if new low price levels are not confirmed by new low
histogram levels, it is considered bullish.
Longer and sharper divergences—distinct peaks or troughs—are regarded as more significant than small, shallow
patterns.
Timing
The MACD is only as useful as the context in which it is applied. An analyst might apply the MACD to a weekly
scale before looking at a daily scale, in order to avoid making short term trades against the direction of the
intermediate trend.[2] Analysts will also vary the parameters of the MACD to track trends of varying duration. One
popular short-term set-up, for example, is the (5,35,5).
False signals
Like any indicator, the MACD can generate false signals. A false positive, for example, would be a bullish crossover
followed by a sudden decline in a stock. A false negative would be a situation where there was no bullish crossover,
yet the stock accelerated suddenly upwards.
A prudent strategy would be to apply a filter to signal line crossovers to ensure that they will hold. An example of a
price filter would be to buy if the MACD line breaks above the signal line and then remains above it for three days.
As with any filtering strategy, this reduces both the probability of false signals as well as the frequency of missed
profit.
Analysts use a variety of approaches to filter out false signals and confirm true ones. As a lagging indicator, the
MACD is often paired with a leading indicator, like the Relative Strength Index (RSI). Historical comparisons to
similar stocks as well as a careful investigation of past price movements provide added information about how a
stock tends to move.MACD 107
Limitations
The MACD has often been criticized for failing to respond in very low or alternately very high volatility market
conditions.[3] Since the MACD measures the divergence between averages, it can give meaningful feedback only as
trends change. Thus, the MACD is less useful if the market is not trending, that is, if it is trading sideways, or if the
market is trading erratically, making sudden, dramatic, or countervailing moves.
In a sideways market, the divergence between averages will not have a trend to illuminate. In an erratic market, the
changes will happen too quickly to be picked up by moving averages or will cancel each other out, diminishing the
MACDs usefulness. A partial caveat to this criticism is that whether a market is trending or volatile is always
relative to a particular timeframe, and the MACD can be adjusted to shorter or longer spans.
Finally, though some analysts trade on technical indicators alone, the abundance of experts recommend a complete
work-up of a company's business sectors, financial strength, past earnings, new products, management, and
institutional buying. For more traditional investors, an indicator like the MACD may be used only to support a
previously determined stock choice, or to select an ideal entry-point into a fundamentally sound stock.
Oscillator classification
The MACD is an absolute price oscillator (APO), because it deals with the actual prices of moving averages rather
than percentage changes. A percentage price oscillator (PPO), on the other hand, computes the difference between
two moving averages of price divided by the longer moving average value.
While an APO will show greater levels for higher priced securities and smaller levels for lower priced securities, a
PPO calculates changes relative to price. Subsequently, a PPO is preferred when: comparing oscillator values
between different securities, especially those with substantially different prices; or comparing oscillator values for
the same security at significantly different times, especially a security whose value has changed greatly.
A third member of the price oscillator family is the detrended price oscillator (DPO), which ignores long term trends
while emphasizing short term patterns.
Signal processing theory
In signal processing terms, the MACD is a filtered measure of velocity. The velocity has been passed through two
first-order linear low pass filters. The "signal line" is that resulting velocity, filtered again. The difference between
those two, the histogram, is a measure of the acceleration, with all three filters applied. An MACD crossover of the
signal line indicates that the direction of the acceleration is changing. The MACD line crossing zero suggests that the
average velocity is changing direction.
History
The MACD was invented by Gerald Appel in the 1970's. Thomas Aspray added a histogram to the MACD in 1986,
as a means to anticipate MACD crossovers, an indicator of important moves in the underlying security.
References
[1]Appel, Gerald (1999). Technical Analysis Power Tools for Active Investors. Financial Times Prentice Hall. pp. 166. ISBN 0131479024.
[2]Murphy, John (1999). Technical Analysis of the Financial Markets. Prentice Hall Press. pp. 252–255. ISBN 0735200661.
[3]Fidelity Trend Trading with Short-Term Patterns (http:/ / personal. fidelity. com/ myfidelity/ atn/ archives/ august2003. html) Retrieved on
May 12, 2007MACD 108
External links
•Interpreting MACD Crossovers, Histograms, and Divergences (http:/ / www. onlinetradingconcepts. com/
TechnicalAnalysis/ MACD. html)
•MACD page (http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ terms/ m/ macd. asp), at Investopedia.com
•MACD page (http:/ / stockcharts. com/ school/ doku.
php?id=chart_school:technical_indicators:moving_average_conve), at Stockcharts.com
Mass index
The mass index is an indicator, developed by Donald Dorsey, used in technical analysis to predict trend reversals. It
is based on the notion that there is a tendency for reversal when the price range widens, and therefore compares
previous trading ranges (highs minus lows).
Mass index for a commodity is obtained[1] by calculating its exponential moving average over a 9 day period and the
exponential moving average of this average (a "double" average), and summing the ratio of these two over a given
amount of days (usually 25).
Generally the EMA and the re-smoothed EMA of EMA are fairly close, making their ratio is roughly 1 and the sum
around 25.
According to Dorsey, a so-called "reversal bulge" is a probable signal of trend reversal (regardless of the trend's
direction).[2] Such a bulge takes place when a 25-day mass index reaches 27.0 and then falls to below 26 (or 26.5). A
9-day prime moving average is usually used to determine whether the bulge is a buy or sell signal.
This formula uses intraday range values: not the "true range," which adjusts for full and partial gaps. Also, the
"bulge" does not indicate direction.
References
[1]Mass Index construction (http:/ / www. incrediblecharts. com/ technical/ mi_construction. htm) at IncredibleCharts.com
[2]Mass Index (http:/ / www. incrediblecharts. com/ technical/ mass_index. htm) at IncredibleCharts.comMoving average 109
Moving average
In statistics, a moving average, also called rolling average, rolling mean or running average, is a type of finite
impulse response filter used to analyze a set of data points by creating a series of averages of different subsets of the
full data set.
Given a series of numbers and a fixed subset size, the moving average can be obtained by first taking the average of
the first subset. The fixed subset size is then shifted forward, creating a new subset of numbers, which is averaged.
This process is repeated over the entire data series. The plot line connecting all the (fixed) averages is the moving
average. Thus, a moving average is not a single number, but it is a set of numbers, each of which is the average of
the corresponding subset of a larger set of data points. A moving average may also use unequal weights for each data
value in the subset to emphasize particular values in the subset.
A moving average is commonly used with time series data to smooth out short-term fluctuations and highlight
longer-term trends or cycles. The threshold between short-term and long-term depends on the application, and the
parameters of the moving average will be set accordingly. For example, it is often used in technical analysis of
financial data, like stock prices, returns or trading volumes. It is also used in economics to examine gross domestic
product, employment or other macroeconomic time series. Mathematically, a moving average is a type of
convolution and so it is also similar to the low-pass filter used in signal processing. When used with non-time series
data, a moving average simply acts as a generic smoothing operation without any specific connection to time,
although typically some kind of ordering is implied.
Simple moving average
A simple moving average (SMA) is the unweighted mean of the previous n data points. For example, a 10-day
simple moving average of closing price is the mean of the previous 10 days' closing prices. If those prices are
then the formula is
When calculating successive values, a new value comes into the sum and an old value drops out, meaning a full
summation each time is unnecessary,
In technical analysis there are various popular values for n, like 10 days, 40 days, or 200 days. The period selected
depends on the kind of movement one is concentrating on, such as short, intermediate, or long term. In any case
moving average levels are interpreted as support in a rising market, or resistance in a falling market.
In all cases a moving average lags behind the latest data point, simply from the nature of its smoothing. An SMA can
lag to an undesirable extent, and can be disproportionately influenced by old data points dropping out of the average.
This is addressed by giving extra weight to more recent data points, as in the weighted and exponential moving
averages.
One characteristic of the SMA is that if the data have a periodic fluctuation, then applying an SMA of that period
will eliminate that variation (the average always containing one complete cycle). But a perfectly regular cycle is
rarely encountered in economics or finance.[1]
For a number of applications it is advantageous to avoid the shifting induced by using only 'past' data. Hence a
central moving average can be computed, using both 'past' and 'future' data. The 'future' data in this case are not
predictions, but merely data obtained after the time at which the average is to be computed.Moving average 110
Cumulative moving average
The cumulative moving average is also frequently called a running average or a long running average although the
term running average is also used as synonym for a moving average. This article uses the term cumulative moving
average or simply cumulative average since this term is more descriptive and unambiguous.
In some data acquisition systems, the data arrives in an ordered data stream and the statistician would like to get the
average of all of the data up until the current data point. For example, an investor may want the average price of all
of the stock transactions for a particular stock up until the current time. As each new transaction occurs, the average
price at the time of the transaction can be calculated for all of the transactions up to that point using the cumulative
average. This is the cumulative average, which is typically an unweighted average of the sequence of i values x1, ...,
xi up to the current time:
The brute force method to calculate this would be to store all of the data and calculate the sum and divide by the
number of data points every time a new data point arrived. However, it is possible to simply update cumulative
average as a new value xi+1 becomes available, using the formula:
where CA0 can be taken to be equal to 0.
Thus the current cumulative average for a new data point is equal to the previous cumulative average plus the
difference between the latest data point and the previous average divided by the number of points received so far.
When all of the data points arrive (i = N), the cumulative average will equal the final average.
The derivation of the cumulative average formula is straightforward. Using
and similarly for i + 1, it is seen that
Solving this equation for CAi+1 results in:
Weighted moving average
A weighted average is any average that has multiplying factors to give different weights to different data points.
Mathematically, the moving average is the convolution of the data points with a moving average function; in
technical analysis, a weighted moving average (WMA) has the specific meaning of weights that decrease
arithmetically. In an n-day WMA the latest day has weight n, the second latest n − 1, etc, down to one.
Moving average 111
WMA weights n = 15
The denominator is a triangle number, and can be easily computed as 
When calculating the WMA across successive values, it can be noted the difference between the numerators of
WMAM+1 and WMAM is npM+1 − pM − ... − pM−n+1. If we denote the sum pM + ... + pM−n+1 by TotalM, then
The graph at the right shows how the weights decrease, from highest weight for the most recent data points, down to
zero. It can be compared to the weights in the exponential moving average which follows.
Exponential moving average
EMA weights N=15
An exponential moving average (EMA), also known as an
exponentially weighted moving average (EWMA),[2] is a type of
infinite impulse response filter that applies weighting factors which
decrease exponentially. The weighting for each older data point
decreases exponentially, never reaching zero. The graph at right shows
an example of the weight decrease.
The formula for calculating the EMA at time periods t > 2 is
Where:
•The coefficient α represents the degree of weighting decrease, a constant smoothing factor between 0 and 1. A
higher α discounts older observations faster. Alternatively, α may be expressed in terms of N time periods, where
α = 2/(N+1). For example, N = 19 is equivalent to α = 0.1. The half-life of the weights (the interval over which the
weights decrease by a factor of two) is approximately N/2.8854 (within 1% if N > 5).
•Yt is the observation at a time period t.
•St' is the value of the EMA at any time period t.
S1 is undefined. S2 may be initialized in a number of different ways, most commonly by setting S2 to Y1, though 
other techniques exist, such as setting S2 to an average of the first 4 or 5 observations. The prominence of the S2 
initialization's effect on the resultant moving average depends on α; smaller α values make the choice of S2 relativelyMoving average 112
more important than larger α values, since a higher α discounts older observations faster.
This formulation is according to Hunter (1986)[3] . By repeated application of this formula for different times, we can
eventually write St as a weighted sum of the data points Yt, as:
for any suitable k = 0, 1, 2, ... The weight of the general data point is .
An alternate approach by Roberts (1959) uses Yt in lieu of Yt−1[4] :
This formula can also be expressed in technical analysis terms as follows, showing how the EMA steps towards the
latest data point, but only by a proportion of the difference (each time):[5]
Expanding out each time results in the following power series, showing how the weighting factor on
each data point p1, p2, etc, decreases exponentially:
[6]
This is an infinite sum with decreasing terms.
The N periods in an N-day EMA only specify the α factor. N is not a stopping point for the calculation in the way it
is in an SMA or WMA. For sufficiently large N, The first N data points in an EMA represent about 86% of the total
weight in the calculation[7] :
i.e. simplified[8] , tends to .
The power formula above gives a starting value for a particular day, after which the successive days formula shown
first can be applied. The question of how far back to go for an initial value depends, in the worst case, on the data. If
there are huge p price values in old data then they'll have an effect on the total even if their weighting is very small.
If one assumes prices don't vary too wildly then just the weighting can be considered. The weight omitted by
stopping after k terms is
which is
i.e. a fraction
out of the total weight.
For example, to have 99.9% of the weight, set above ratio equal to 0.1% and solve for k:
terms should be used. Since approaches as N increases[9] , this simplifies to approximately[10]Moving average 113
for this example (99.9% weight).
Modified moving average
A modified moving average (MMA), running moving average (RMA), or smoothed moving average is defined
as:
In short, this is exponential moving average, with .
Application to measuring computer performance
Some computer performance metrics, e.g. the average process queue length, or the average CPU utilization, use a
form of exponential moving average.
Here is defined as a function of time between two readings. An example of a coefficient giving bigger weight to
the current reading, and smaller weight to the older readings is
where time for readings tn is expressed in seconds, and is the period of time in minutes over which the reading is
said to be averaged (the mean lifetime of each reading in the average). Given the above definition of , the moving
average can be expressed as
For example, a 15-minute average L of a process queue length Q, measured every 5 seconds (time difference is 5
seconds), is computed as
Other weightings
Other weighting systems are used occasionally – for example, in share trading a volume weighting will weight each
time period in proportion to its trading volume.
A further weighting, used by actuaries, is Spencer's 15-Point Moving Average[11] (a central moving average). The
symmetric weight coefficients are -3, -6, -5, 3, 21, 46, 67, 74, 67, 46, 21, 3, -5, -6, -3.
Moving median
From a statistical point of view, the moving average, when used to estimate the underlying trend in a time series, is
susceptible to rare events such as rapid shocks or other anomalies. A more robust estimate of the trend is the simple
moving median over n time points:
where the median is found by, for example, sorting the values inside the brackets and finding the value in the middle.
Statistically, the moving average is optimal for recovering the underlying trend of the time series when the 
fluctuations about the trend are normally distributed. However, the normal distribution does not place high 
probability on very large deviations from the trend which explains why such deviations will have a 
disproportionately large effect on the trend estimate. It can be shown that if the fluctuations are instead assumed to 
be Laplace distributed, then the moving median is statistically optimal[12] . For a given variance, the Laplace 
distribution places higher probability on rare events than does the normal, which explains why the moving medianMoving average 114
tolerates shocks better than the moving mean.
When the simple moving median above is central, the smoothing is identical to the median filter which has
applications in, for example, image signal processing.
Notes and references
[1]Statistical Analysis, Ya-lun Chou, Holt International, 1975, ISBN 0030894220, section 17.9.
[2]http:/ / lorien. ncl. ac. uk/ ming/ filter/ filewma. htm
[3]NIST/SEMATECH e-Handbook of Statistical Methods: Single Exponential Smoothing (http:/ / www. itl. nist. gov/ div898/ handbook/ pmc/
section4/ pmc431. htm) at the National Institute of Standards and Technology
[4]NIST/SEMATECH e-Handbook of Statistical Methods: EWMA Control Charts (http:/ / www. itl. nist. gov/ div898/ handbook/ pmc/
section3/ pmc324. htm) at the National Institute of Standards and Technology
[5]Moving Averages page (http:/ / www. stockcharts. com/ education/ IndicatorAnalysis/ indic_movingAvg. html) at StockCharts.com
[6]
 ,
since .
[7]
The denominator on the left-hand side should be unity, and the numerator will become the right-hand side (geometric series),
.
[8]Because (1+x/n)n becomes ex for large n.
[9]
It means -> 0, and the Taylor series of tends to .
[10] loge(0.001) / 2 = -3.45
[11] Spencer's 15-Point Moving Average — from Wolfram MathWorld (http:/ / mathworld. wolfram. com/ Spencers15-PointMovingAverage.
html)
[12] G.R. Arce, "Nonlinear Signal Processing: A Statistical Approach", Wiley:New Jersey, USA, 2005.
External links
•EWMA in determining network traffic and ethernet (http:/ / www. think-lamp. com/ 2009/ 03/
the-hidden-power-of-ping/ )
•FastMedFilt1D: Fast Matlab software for computing the simple moving median of a time series. (http:/ / www.
physics. ox. ac. uk/ users/ littlem/ software/ )
,Parabolic SAR 115
Parabolic SAR
Parabolic SAR for Ebay during 2002.
In the field of technical analysis,
Parabolic SAR (SAR - stop and
reverse) is a method devised by J.
Welles Wilder, Jr., to find trends in
market prices or securities. It may be
used as a trailing stop loss based on
prices tending to stay within a
parabolic curve during a strong trend.
The concept draws on the idea that
time is the enemy (similar to option
theory's concept of time decay), and
unless a security can continue to
generate more profits over time, it
should be liquidated. The indicator
generally works well in trending
markets, but provides "whipsaws" during non-trending, sideways phases; as such, Wilder recommended establishing
the strength and direction of the trend first through the use of things such as the Average Directional Index, and then
using the Parabolic SAR to trade that trend.
A parabola below the price is generally bullish, while a parabola above is generally bearish.
Construction
The Parabolic SAR is calculated almost independently for each trend in the price. When the price is in an uptrend,
the SAR appears below the price and converges upwards towards it. Similarly, on a downtrend, the SAR appears
above the price and converges downwards.
At each step within a trend, the SAR is calculated ahead of time. That is, tomorrow's SAR value is built using data
available today. The general formula used for this is:
Where and represent today's and tomorrow's SAR values, respectively.
The extreme point, , is a record kept during each trend that represents the highest value reached by the price
during the current uptrend — or lowest value during a downtrend. On each period, if a new maximum (or minimum)
is observed, the EP is updated with that value.
The value represents the acceleration factor. Usually, this is set to a value of 0.02 initially. This factor is
increased by 0.02 each time a new EP is recorded. In other words, each time a new EP is observed, it will increase
the acceleration factor. This will then quicken the rate at which the SAR converges towards the price. To keep it
from getting too large, a maximum value for the acceleration factor is normally set at 0.20, so that it never goes
beyond that. For stocks trading, it is preferable to set the acceleration factor to 0.01, in order to be less sensitive to
local decreases. For commodity or currency trading, it is preferable to use a value of 0.02.
The SAR is iteratively calculated for each new period using this recursive definition. There are, however, two special
cases that will modify the SAR value:
•If tomorrow's SAR value lies within (or beyond) today's or yesterday's price range, the SAR must be set to the
closest price bound. For example, if in an uptrend, the new SAR value is calculated and it results to be greater
than today's or yesterday's lowest price, the SAR must be set equal to that lower boundary.Parabolic SAR 116
•If tomorrow's SAR value lies within (or beyond) tomorrow's price range, a new trend direction is then signaled,
and the SAR must "switch sides."
Upon a trend switch, several things happen. The first SAR value for this new trend is set to the last EP recorded on
the previous trend. The EP is then reset accordingly to this period's maximum. The acceleration factor is reset to its
initial value of 0.02.
External links
•Using Parabolic SAR for Buy and Sell signals, and placing Stop Loss orders [1]
•How to Trade Parabolic SAR - InformedTrades [2]
•Yahoo! Finance Charts User Guide [3]
References
•J. Welles Wilder, Jr. (June 1978). New Concepts in Technical Trading Systems. Greensboro, NC: Trend Research.
ISBN 978-0894590276.
References
[1]http:/ / www. onlinetradingconcepts. com/ TechnicalAnalysis/ ParabolicSAR. html
[2]http:/ / www. informedtrades. com/ 4559-how-trade-parabolic-sar-forex-futures-stocks. html
[3]http:/ / biz. yahoo. com/ charts/ guide16. html
Trix (technical analysis)
Trix (or TRIX) is a technical analysis oscillator developed in the 1980s by Jack Hutson, editor of Technical
Analysis of Stocks and Commodities magazine. It shows the slope (i.e. derivative) of a triple-smoothed exponential
moving average. The name Trix is from "triple exponential."
Trix is calculated with a given N-day period as follows:
•Smooth prices (often closing prices) using an N-day exponential moving average (EMA).
•Smooth that series using another N-day EMA.
•Smooth a third time, using a further N-day EMA.
•Calculate the percentage difference between today's and yesterday's value in that final smoothed series.
Like any moving average, the triple EMA is just a smoothing of price data and therefore is trend-following. A rising
or falling line is an uptrend or downtrend and Trix shows the slope of that line, so it's positive for a steady uptrend,
negative for a downtrend, and a crossing through zero is a trend-change, i.e. a peak or trough in the underlying
average.
The triple-smoothed EMA is very different from a plain EMA. In a plain EMA the latest few days dominate and the
EMA follows recent prices quite closely; however, applying it three times results in weightings spread much more
broadly, and the weights for the latest few days are in fact smaller than those of days further past. The following
graph shows the weightings for an N=10 triple EMA (most recent days at the left):Trix (technical analysis) 117
Triple exponential moving average weightings, N=10 (percentage versus days ago)
Note that the distribution's mode will
lie with pN-2's weight, i.e. in the graph
above p8 carries the highest weighting.
An N of 1 is invalid.
The easiest way to calculate the triple EMA based on successive values is just to apply the EMA three times,
creating single-, then double-, then triple-smoothed series. The triple EMA can also be expressed directly in terms of
the prices as below, with today's close, yesterday's, etc., and with (as for a
plain EMA):
The coefficients are the triangle numbers, n(n+1)/2. In theory, the sum is infinite, using all past data, but as f is less
than 1 the powers become smaller as the series progresses, and they decrease faster than the coefficients
increase, so beyond a certain point the terms are negligible.
References
•StockCharts.com article on TRIX [1], by Nicholas Fisher
References
[1]http:/ / stockcharts. com/ education/ IndicatorAnalysis/ indic_trix. htmVortex Indicator 118
Vortex Indicator
The Vortex Indicator is a technical indicator invented by Etienne Botes and Douglas Siepman to identify the start
of a new trend or the continuation of an existing trend within financial markets. It was published in the January 2010
edition of Technical Analysis of Stocks & Commodities.[1]
Inspiration
The Vortex Indicator was inspired by the work of an Austrian inventor, Viktor Schauberger, who studied the flow of
water in rivers and turbines. Etienne Botes and Douglas Siepman developed the idea that movements and flows
within financial markets are similar to the vortex motions found in water. The Vortex Indicator was also partly
inspired by J. Welles Wilder's concept of directional movement, which assumes the relationship between price bars
gives clues as to the direction of a market.[2]
Description
A vortex pattern may be observed in any market by connecting the lows of that market’s price bars with the
consecutive bars’ highs, and then price bar highs with consecutive lows. The greater the distance between the low of
a price bar and the subsequent bar’s high, the greater the upward or positive Vortex movement (VM+). Similarly, the
greater the distance between a price bar’s high and the subsequent bar’s low, the greater the downward or negative
Vortex movement (VM-).
A Vortex Pattern in the Market: By connecting the lows of price bars with the consecutive bars’ highs, and then price bar highs with consecutive
lows, one can observe a vortex pattern in the market.
The Vortex Indicator: The greater the distance between the low of a price bar and the subsequent bar’s high, the stronger the positive Vortex
movement (VM+). Similarly, the greater the distance between a price bar’s high and the subsequent bar’s low, the stronger the negative Vortex
movement (VM-).Vortex Indicator 119
Identifying a trend
On a chart, VI+ and VI- will be seen to intersect each other at a change of trend, and begin to diverge ever wider as
the strength of a trend increases. When VI+ is larger and above VI-, the market is trending up. Conversely, when VI-
is bigger and above VI+, the market is trending down.
A trader should focus on the key trend change points of the Vortex Indicator (i.e. the crossing points of VI+ and
VI-). When VI+ crosses above VI-, a long (buy) position is indicated. A short or sell position is suggested when VI-
crosses above VI+.
The published article also suggested further measures to ensure an effective trading strategy, for example, only
entering a trade at the extreme high or low of the price bar that corresponds with a crossing of the Vortex
Indicator.[3]
14-Period Daily Vortex Indicator: When VI+ is greater than VI-, it indicates that the market is trending up. The market is trending down when
VI- is above VI+. The potential change of trend points are found where VI+ and VI- intersect one another.
Price Chart: As the trend strengthens, notice how the VI+ and VI- lines increasingly diverge. As the trend weakens, you will observe the two lines
converging again.
Calculation
The high, low and close values are required for any chosen stock, future, commodity or currency. These values may
be 15-minute, hourly, daily, etc.
•First, calculate the current True Range: 
•Current True Range (TR) = Maximum absolute value of either (Current High-Current Low), (Current
Low-Previous Close), (Current High-Previous Close)
•Next, calculate the current upward (positive) and downward (negative) Vortex movements: 
•Current Vortex Movement Up (VM+) = Absolute value of Current High – Previous Low
•Current Vortex Movement Down (VM-) = Absolute Value of Current Low – Previous HighVortex Indicator 120
•Decide on a parameter length (21 periods was used for this example). Now, sum the last 21 period’s True
Range, VM+ and VM-:
•Sum of the last 21 periods’ True Range = SUM TR21
•Sum of the last 21 periods’ VM+ = SUM VM21+
•Sum of the last 21 periods’ VM- = SUM VM21-
•Finally, divide SUM VM21+ and SUM VM21- respectively with the SUM TR21 to obtain the Vortex
Indicator:
•SUM VM21+/SUM TR21 = VI21+
•SUM VM21-/SUM TR21 = VI21-
If this process is repeated, the resulting VI21+ and VI21- can be drawn graphically to represent the two lines of the
Vortex Indicator.
Practical application
The Vortex Indicator is simple to use as the only required inputs are the high, low and close of a price bar. Traders
may use the Vortex Indicator on its own, in combination with other technical indicators to confirm a change of trend
or as part of a larger trading system.
In addition, the Vortex Indicator may be used for any:
•market (such as stocks, futures or currencies)
•time frame (for example, 15 minute, hourly or weekly charts)
•parameter (such as 13, 21 or 34 periods)
The inventors of the Vortex Indicator recommend using longer time frames and parameters in order to filter out false
signals. If a trader does opt to use a very short time frame, such as 5 minutes, this should be combined with a long
parameter of 34 or 55 periods.
Because of its universal applicability, the Vortex Indicator is suitable for both short term traders as well as longer
term fund managers who may wish to identify larger macro trends within a market.
Coding and strategies
The Vortex Indicator is available on most charting software.[4] Some of these companies have suggested additional
trading strategies to use in conjunction with the Vortex Indicator, including the implementation of a trailing stop [5]
and making use of supporting indicators in order to reduce the number of false signals.[6]
Comparative studies
To test the Vortex Indicator against Welles Wilder’s Directional Movement Indicator (DMI), a portfolio of 38 of the
most actively traded, full sized, futures contracts was created. These 38 futures included a number of index and
financial futures, currencies, metals, energy futures and commodities like grains, oils and foods. The test period was
from 3 January 1978 to 6 November 2009, using a 14 day parameter for both indicators. Over the entire test period,
and also during the last 10 years, the Vortex Indicator showed a better performance than the DMI.[7]
However, using a similar test based on 101 NASDAQ stocks, on a smaller sample (for the period 2 January 1992 to
14 August 2009), the DMI showed a better performance than the Vortex Indicator.[8]Vortex Indicator 121
Possible improvement and variation
An alternative version of the indicator was created by Jez Liberty.[9] This version enables the calculation to account
for gap days which sometimes occur in non-continuous markets such as stocks.[10]
References
[1]Botes, Etienne & Siepman, Douglas (January 2010). “The Vortex Indicator”. Technical Analysis of Stocks & Commodities 28(1), p. 21.
[2]Wilder, J. Welles (1978). New Concepts In Technical Trading Systems. Trend Research.
[3]Botes, Etienne & Siepman, Douglas (January 2010). “The Vortex Indicator”. Technical Analysis of Stocks & Commodities 28(1), p. 25.
[4]"Traders’ Tips" (http:/ / www. traders. com/ Documentation/ FEEDbk_docs/ 2010/ 01/ TradersTips. html). Technical Analysis of Stocks &
Commodities. January 2010. . Retrieved 17 January 2010.
[5]Mills, Mark (January 2010). "TRADESTATION: VORTEX INDICATOR" (http:/ / www. traders. com/ Documentation/ FEEDbk_docs/
2010/ 01/ TradersTips. html). TradeStation Securities, Inc. . Retrieved 17 January 2010.
[6]Rast, Pete (January 2010). "STRATASEARCH: VORTEX INDICATOR" (http:/ / www. traders. com/ Documentation/ FEEDbk_docs/ 2010/
01/ TradersTips. html). Avarin Systems, Inc. . Retrieved 17 January 2010.
[7]Denning, Richard (January 2010). "January 2010 Stocks and Commodities Traders Tips" (http:/ / www. tradersedgesystems. com/ aiq/
traderstips/ traders-tips-january-2010. htm). Traders Edge Systems. . Retrieved 17 January 2010.
[8]Denning, Richard (January 2010). "January 2010 Stocks and Commodities Traders Tips" (http:/ / www. tradersedgesystems. com/ aiq/
traderstips/ traders-tips-january-2010. htm). Traders Edge Systems. . Retrieved 17 January 2010.
[9]Liberty, Jez (April 2010). “Vortex Indicator In Trading Blox”. Technical Analysis of Stocks & Commodities 28(5), p. 76.
[10] Liberty, Jez (February 2010). "Vortex indicator" (http:/ / www. automated-trading-system. com/ free-code-improved-vortex/ ). Automated
Trading System. . Retrieved 11 November 2010.
External links
•The Vortex Indicator (http:/ / www. traders. com/ Reprints/ PDF_reprints/ VFX_VORTEX. PDF)
Know Sure Thing (KST) Oscillator
Know Sure Thing (KST) Oscillator is a complex, smoothed price velocity indicator developed by Martin J. Pring.[1]
[2]
Rate of Change (ROC) indicator is the foundation of KST indicator. KST indicator is useful to identify major stock
market cycle junctures because it formula is weighed to have larger influence by the longer and more dominant time
span to better reflecting the primary swings of stock market cycle.[3] . The concept behind the oscillator is that price
trends are determined by the interaction of many different time cycles and that important trend reversals take place
when a number of price trends are simultaneously changing direction.
Formula
Four different rates of change are calculated, smoothed, multiplied by weights and then summed to form one
indicator.[4]
Where Price refers to current closing price and Price(X1) refers to the closing price X1 bars ago.
Where MOV(ROC1,AVG1) refers to the AVG1 day moving average for ROC1
For Short term trend, Martin J Pring suggest the following parameters:Know Sure Thing (KST) Oscillator 122
X1 = 10
X2 = 15
X3 = 20
X4 = 30
AVG1 = 10
AVG2 = 10
AVG3 = 10
AVG4 = 15
W1 = 1
W2 = 2
W3 = 3
W4 = 4
The formula is built into, or can be included into various technical analysis softwares like MetaStock[5] or
OmniTrader[6] .
Implications
Entry rules KST Indicator
When KST crosses below its 8 day exponential average, short at the next day opening price.
Exit rules KST Indicator
When KST crosses above its 8 day exponential average, close short position at the next day opening price.[4]
Variations
It can be calculated on daily[7] or long term[8] basis.
The dominant time frame in the Know Sure Thing (KST)'s construction is a 24-month period, which is half of the
4-year business cycle. This means that the Know Sure Thing (KST) will work best when the security in question is
experiencing a primary up- and downtrend based on the business cycle.[4]
KST Interpretation
KST can be interpreted in the ways mentioned below.[7]
The dominant time frame in the Know Sure Thing (KST)'s construction is a 24-month period, which is half of the
4-year business cycle. This means that the Know Sure Thing (KST) will work best when the security in question is
experiencing a primary up- and downtrend based on the business cycle.
Directional Changes and Moving Average Crossovers
You’ve discovered how changes in direction are the way the KST triggers signals, but also that moving average
crossovers offer less timely, but more reliable signals. The average to use is a simple 10-day moving average. It is
possible to anticipate a moving average crossover if the KST has already turned and the price violates a trendline.
The KST started to reverse to the downside before the up trendline was violated. Since either a reversal or a trading
range follow a valid trendline violation, it’s evident that upside momentum has temporarily dissipated, causing the
KST to cross below its moving average.Know Sure Thing (KST) Oscillator 123
Traditionally, the MACD gives buy and sell signals when it crosses above and below its exponential moving
average, known as the “signal line”. This approach isn’t perfect; the ellipses on the chart highlight all the whipsaws.
As said earlier, the KST can also give false or misleading signals, as you can see from the April 2005 buy signal. It
comes close to a couple of whipsaws, but by and large, it’s more accurate, even though the MACD often turns faster
than the KST.
Overbought/Oversold and Divergences
The concept is that when the indicator crosses above and below the overbought/oversold zones, momentum buy and
sell signals are triggered. Even so, you must wait for some kind of trend reversal signal in the price, such as a price
pattern completion, trendline violation, or similar.
The KST often diverges positively and negatively with the price.
Trendline Violations and Price Pattern Completions
It is possible to construct a trendline on the KST and see when it’s been violated, but not very often. When it does
though, it usually results in a powerful signal.
References
[1]Martin J. Pring (1991). Technical Analysis Explained (3rd ed.). McGraw/Hill.
[2]Robert W. Colby (2003). The encyclopedia of technical market indicators (http:/ / books. google. co. in/ books?id=SYWkGQawUgAC&
pg=PA346& lpg=PA346& dq=Know+ Sure+ Thing+ (KST)+ Oscillator& source=bl& ots=I0INaZylU8&
sig=yuqDNjXlMtKT09UcjsepYmO4CQg& hl=en& ei=VMPaTM2ABI2UvAO2hej2CQ& sa=X& oi=book_result& ct=result& resnum=2&
ved=0CCMQ6AEwAQ#v=onepage& q& f=false). McGraw-Hill Professional. p. 346. . Retrieved 2010-11-10.
[3]"Technical Analysis - Online Know Sure Thing (KST) Indicator Lessons" (http:/ / www. 1technicalanalysis. com/ momentum-indicators/
KST-know-sure-thing/ online-know-sure-thing-lessons. php). . Retrieved 2010-11-10.
[4]"KST( Know sure thing ) indicator in stock market" (http:/ / abc-stock-market. blogspot. com/ 2009/ 06/
kst-know-sure-thing-indicator-in-stock. html). http:/ / abc-stock-market. blogspot. com. . Retrieved 2010-11-10.
[5]"KST Oscillator : Martin Prings formula" (http:/ / forum. esignalcentral. com/ showthread. php?threadid=29167). eSignal. . Retrieved
2010-11-10.
[6]"Nirvana Pring KST Package Plug-in" (http:/ / www. omnitrader. com/ omnitrader/ products/ OT/ plugins/ KST. asp). OmniTrader. .
Retrieved 2010-11-10.
[7]Martin J. Pring. "Introducing the Daily KST" (http:/ / www. pring. com/ movieweb/ daily_kst. htm). pring.com. . Retrieved 2010-11-10.
[8]Martin J. Pring. "Long-term KST" (http:/ / www. pring. com/ articles/ article28. htm). pring.com. . Retrieved 2010-11-10.124
INDICATORS: Momentum
Momentum (finance)
In finance, momentum is the empirically observed tendency for rising asset prices to rise further. For instance, it
was shown that stocks with strong past performance continue to outperform stocks with poor past performance in the
next period with an average excess return of about 1% per month (Jegadeesh and Titman, 1993, 1999).
The existence of momentum is a market anomaly, which finance theory struggles to explain. The difficulty is that an
increase in asset prices, in and of itself, should not warrant further increase. Such increase, according to the
efficient-market hypothesis, is warranted only by changes in demand and supply or new information (cf.
fundamental analysis). Students of financial economics have largely attributed the appearance of momentum to
cognitive biases, which belong in the realm of behavioral economics. The explanation is that investors are irrational
(Daniel, Hirschleifer, and Subrahmanyam, 1998 and Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1998), in that they underreact to
new information by failing to incorporate news in their transaction prices. However, much as in the case of price
bubbles, recent research has argued that momentum can be observed even with perfectly rational traders (Crombez,
2001).
References
•Barberis, N., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny. “A Model of Investor Sentiment.” Journal of Financial Economics, 49,
1998.
•Crombez, J. "Momentum, Rational Agents and Efficient Markets." The Journal of Psychology and Financial
Markets, 2, 2001.
•Daniel, K., D. Hirschleifer, and A. Subrahmanyam. “A Theory of Overconfidence, Self-Attribution, and Security
Market Under and Over-reactions.” Journal of Finance, 53, 1998.
•Jegadeesh, N., and S. Titman. “Returns to Buying Winners and Selling Losers: Implications for Stock Market
Efficiency.” Journal of Finance, 48, 1993.
•Jegadeesh, N., and S. Titman. “Profitability of Momentum Strategies: An Evaluation of Alternative Explanations.”
NBER Working paper #7159, 1999.Relative Strength Index 125
Relative Strength Index
The Relative Strength Index (RSI) is a technical indicator used in the technical analysis of financial markets. It is
intended to chart the current and historical strength or weakness of a stock or market based on the closing prices of a
recent trading period. The indicator should not be confused with relative strength.
The RSI is classified as a momentum oscillator, measuring the velocity and magnitude of directional price
movements. Momentum is the rate of the rise or fall in price. The RSI computes momentum as the ratio of higher
closes to lower closes: stocks which have had more or stronger positive changes have a higher RSI than stocks which
have had more or stronger negative changes.
The RSI is most typically used on a 14 day timeframe, measured on a scale from 0 to 100, with high and low levels
marked at 70 and 30, respectively. Shorter or longer timeframes are used for alternately shorter or longer outlooks.
More extreme high and low levels—80 and 20, or 90 and 10—occur less frequently but indicate stronger
momentum.
The Relative Strength Index was developed by J. Welles Wilder and published in a 1978 book, New Concepts in
Technical Trading Systems, and in Commodities magazine (now Futures magazine) in the June 1978 issue.[1]
Calculation
For each trading period an upward change U or downward change D is calculated. Up periods are characterized by
the close being higher than the previous close:
Conversely, a down period is characterized by the close being lower than the previous period's (note that D is
nonetheless a positive number),
If the last close is the same as the previous, both U and D are zero. The average U and D are calculated using an
n-period exponential moving average (EMA). The ratio of these averages is the Relative Strength:
If the average of D values is zero, then the RSI value is defined as 100.
The Relative Strength is then converted to a Relative Strength Index between 0 and 100:
The exponential moving averages should be appropriately initialized with a simple averages using the first n values
in the price series.Relative Strength Index 126
Interpretation
Basic configuration
Relative Strength Index 14-period
The RSI is presented on a graph above
or below the price chart. The indicator
has an upper line, typically at 70, a
lower line at 30, and a dashed mid-line
at 50. Wilder recommended a
smoothing period of 14 (see EMA
smoothing, i.e. α = 1/14 or N = 27).
Principles
Wilder posited that when price moves
up very rapidly, at some point it is
considered overbought. Likewise,
when price falls very rapidly, at some
point it is considered oversold. In
either case, Wilder deemed a reaction
or reversal imminent.
The level of the RSI is a measure of the stock's recent trading strength. The slope of the RSI is directly proportional
to the velocity of a change in the trend. The distance traveled by the RSI is proportional to the magnitude of the
move.
Wilder believed that tops and bottoms are indicated when RSI goes above 70 or drops below 30. Traditionally, RSI
readings greater than the 70 level are considered to be in overbought territory, and RSI readings lower than the 30
level are considered to be in oversold territory. In between the 30 and 70 level is considered neutral, with the 50 level
a sign of no trend.
Divergence
Wilder further believed that divergence between RSI and price action is a very strong indication that a market
turning point is imminent. Bearish divergence occurs when price makes a new high but the RSI makes a lower high,
thus failing to confirm. Bullish divergence occurs when price makes a new low but RSI makes a higher low.
Overbought and oversold conditions
Wilder thought that "failure swings" above 70 and below 30 on the RSI are strong indications of market reversals.
For example, assume the RSI hits 76, pulls back to 72, then rises to 77. If it falls below 72, Wilder would consider
this a "failure swing" above 70.
Finally, Wilder wrote that chart formations and areas of support and resistance could sometimes be more easily seen
on the RSI chart as opposed to the price chart. The center line for the relative strength index is 50, which is often
seen as both the support and resistance line for the indicator.
If the relative strength index is below 50, it generally means that the stock's losses are greater than the gains. When
the relative strength index is above 50, it generally means that the gains are greater than the losses.Relative Strength Index 127
Uptrends and downtrends
In addition to Wilder's original theories of RSI interpretation, Andrew Cardwell has developed several new
interpretations of RSI to help determine and confirm trend. First, Cardwell noticed that uptrends generally traded
between RSI 40 and 80, while downtrends usually traded between RSI 60 and 20. Cardwell observed when securities
change from uptrend to downtrend and vice versa, the RSI will undergo a "range shift."
Example of RSI Indicator Divergence
Next, Cardwell noted that bearish
divergence: 1) only occurs in uptrends,
and 2) mostly only leads to a brief
correction instead of a reversal in
trend. Therefore bearish divergence is
a sign confirming an uptrend.
Similarly, bullish divergence is a sign
confirming a downtrend.
Reversals
Finally, Cardwell discovered the
existence of positive and negative
reversals in the RSI. Reversals are the
opposite of divergence. For example, a
positive reversal occurs when an uptrend price correction results in a higher low compared to the last price
correction, while RSI results in a lower low compared to the prior correction. A negative reversal happens when a
downtrend rally results in a lower high compared to the last downtrend rally, but RSI makes a higher high compared
to the prior rally.
In other words, despite stronger momentum as seen by the higher high or lower low in the RSI, price could not make
a higher high or lower low. This is evidence the main trend is about to resume. Cardwell noted that positive reversals
only happen in uptrends while negative reversals only occur in downtrends, and therefore their existence confirms
the trend.
Cutler's RSI
A variation called Cutler's RSI is based on a simple moving average of U and D,[2] instead of the exponential
average above. Cutler had found that since Wilder used an exponential moving average to calculate RSI, the value of
Wilder's RSI depended upon where in the data file his calculations started. Cutler termed this Data Length
Dependency. Cutler's RSI is not data length dependent, and returns consistent results regardless of the length of, or
the starting point within a data file.
Cutler's RSI generally comes out slightly different from the normal Wilder RSI, but the two are similar, since SMA
and EMA are also similar.Relative Strength Index 128
References
[1]J. Welles Wilder, New Concepts in Technical Trading Systems, ISBN 0-89459-027-8
[2]Cutler's RSI page (http:/ / www. aspenres. com/ Documents/ AspenGraphics4. 0/ CutlersRSI. htm) at Aspen Graphics Technical Analysis
Software
External links
•Cardwell Techniques with the RSI (http:/ / www. optionetics. com/ market/ articles/ 19819)
Stochastic oscillator
In technical analysis of securities trading, the stochastics oscillator is a momentum indicator that uses support and
resistance levels. Dr. George Lane promoted this indicator in the 1950s. The term stochastic refers to the location of
a current price in relation to its price range over a period of time.[1] This method attempts to predict price turning
points by comparing the closing price of a security to its price range.
The indicator is defined as follows:
where H and L are respectively the highest and the lowest price over the last periods, and
In working with %D it is important to remember that there is only one valid signal—a divergence between %D
and the security with which you are working.[2]
Definition
Stochastics Fast & Slow
The calculation above finds the range between an
asset’s high and low price during a given period of
time. The current securities price is then expressed as a
percentage of this range with 0% indicating the bottom
of the range and 100% indicating the upper limits of the
range over the time period covered. The idea behind
this indicator is that prices tend to close near the
extremes of the recent range before turning points. The
Stochastic oscillator is calculated:
Where
is the last closing price
is the lowest
price over the last N periods
is the highest price over the last N periods
is a 3-period exponential moving average of %K.
is a 3-period exponential moving average of %D.
A 3-line Stochastics will give you an anticipatory signal in %K, a signal in the turnaround of %D at or before a
bottom, and a confirmation of the turnaround in %D-Slow.[3] Typical values for N are 5, 9, or 14 periods. Smoothing
the indicator over 3 periods is standard.Stochastic oscillator 129
Dr. George Lane, a financial analyst, is one of the first to publish on the use of stochastic oscillators to forecast
prices. According to Lane, the Stochastics indicator is to be used with cycles, Elliot Wave Theory and Fibonacci
retracement for timing. In low margin, calendar futures spreads, you might use Wilders parabolic as a trailing stop
after a stochastics entry. A centerpiece of his teaching is the divergence and convergence of trendlines drawn on
stochastics, as diverging/converging to trendlines drawn on price cycles. Stochastics predicts tops and bottoms.
Interpretation
The signal to act is when you have a divergence-convergence, in an extreme area, with a crossover on the right hand
side, of a cycle bottom.[4] As plain crossovers can occur frequently, one typically waits for crossovers occurring
together with an extreme pullback, after a peak or trough in the %D line. If price volatility is high, an exponential
moving average of the %D indicator may be taken, which tends to smooth out rapid fluctuations in price.
Stochastics attempts to predict turning points by comparing the closing price of a security to its price range. Prices
tend to close near the extremes of the recent range just before turning points. In the case of an uptrend, prices tend to
make higher highs, and the settlement price usually tends to be in the upper end of that time period's trading range.
When the momentum starts to slow, the settlement prices will start to retreat from the upper boundaries of the range,
causing the stochastic indicator to turn down at or before the final price high.[5]
An alert or set-up is present when the %D line is in an extreme area and diverging from the price action. The actual
signal takes place when the faster % K line crosses the % D line.[6]
Divergence-convergence is an indication that the momentum in the market is waning and a reversal may be in the
making. The chart below illustrates an example of where a divergence in stochastics relative to price forecasts a
reversal in the price's direction.
Stochastic oscillator 130
Stochastics pop
This is when prices pop through and keep on going - that is, break out.
Rules to follow:
Increase long position — When price crosses the upper band from below.
Increase short position — When price crosses the lower band from above.
Liquidate position — When Stochastic %D crosses %K in direction reversed to open trade.[7]
References
[1]Murphy, John J. (1999). " John Murphy's Ten Laws of Technical Trading (http:/ / stockcharts. com/ school/ doku.
php?id=chart_school:trading_strategies:john_murphy_s_ten_laws)".
[2]Lane, George M.D. (May/June 1984) “Lane’s Stochastics,” second issue of Technical Analysis of Stocks and Commodities magazine. pp
87-90.
[3]Lane, George C. & Caire (1998) "Getting Started With Stochastics" pg 3
[4]Lane, George M.D. (May/June 1984) “Lane’s Stochastics,” second issue of Technical Analysis of Stocks and Commodities magazine. pp
87-90.
[5]Person, John L (2004). A Complete Guide to Technical Trading Tactics: How to Profit Using Pivot Points, Candlesticks & Other Indicators.
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. pp. 144–145. ISBN 0-471-58455-X.
[6]Murphy, John J (1999). Technical Analysis of the Financial Markets: A Comprehensive Guide to Trading Methods and Applications. New
York: New York Institute of Finance. p. 247. ISBN 0-7352-0066-1.
[7]Bernstein, Jake (1995). The Complete Day Trader. New York: McGraw Hill. ISBN 0-07-009251-6.
External links
•Stochastic Oscillator at Investopedia (http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ terms/ s/ stochasticoscillator. asp)
•Stochastic Oscillator page (http:/ / stockcharts. com/ school/ doku.
php?id=chart_school:technical_indicators:stochastic_oscillator) at StockCharts.comWilliams %R 131
Williams %R
Williams %R, or just %R, is a technical analysis oscillator showing the current closing price in relation to the high
and low of the past N days (for a given N). It was developed by a publisher and promoter of trading materials, Larry
Williams. Its purpose is to tell whether a stock or commodity market is trading near the high or the low, or
somewhere in between, of its recent trading range.
The oscillator is on a negative scale, from -100 (lowest) up to 0 (highest), considered unusual since it is the obverse
of the more common 0 to 100 scale found in many Technical Analysis oscillators. Although sometimes altered (by
simply adding 100), this scale needn't cause any confusion. A value of -100 is the close today at the lowest low of
the past N days, and 0 is a close today at the highest high of the past N days.
Buy-/Sell-Signalling
Williams used a 10 trading day period and considered values below -80 as oversold and above -20 as overbought.
But they were not to be traded directly, instead his rule to buy an oversold was
•%R reaches -100%.
•Five trading days pass since -100% was last reached
•%R rises above -95% or -85%.
or conversely to sell an overbought condition
•%R reaches 0%.
•Five trading days pass since 0% was last reached
•%R falls below -5% or -15%.
The timeframe can be changed for either more sensitive or smoother results. The more sensitive you make it, though,
the more false signals you will get.
Notes
Due to the equivalence
the %R indicator is arithmetically exactly equivalent to the %K stochastic oscillator, mirrored at the 0%-line, when
using the same time interval.132
INDICATORS: Volume
Volume (finance)
Volume, or trading volume, is a term in capital markets, referring to the number of shares or contracts traded in a
security or in an entire market during a given period of time.
In the context of stock trading on a stock exchange, the volume is commonly reported as the number of shares that
changed hands during the day. Average volume is reported as the average volume over a longer period of time,
normally one to three months. When the significant positive or negative news is made public about a company, the
volume of the company's stock will usually deviate from its average volume, meaning that more people are trading
this stock.
Higher volume for a stock is an indicator of higher liquidity. For institutional investors who wish to sell a large
number of shares of a certain stock, lower volume will force them to sell the stock slowly over a longer period of
time.
Legal implications
The calculation of the volume of a security has some legal implications. For example, in the United States, a person
who sells a certain number of shares of a security in proportion to its weekly volume may be deemed an underwriter
of that security under Rule 144 of the Securities Act of 1933. The calculation of the trading volume is therefore
regulated by the SEC[1] .
References
[1]SEC Interpretation: Calculation of Average Weekly Trading Volume under Rule 144 and Termination of a Rule 10b5-1 Trading Plan (http:/ /
www. sec. gov/ rules/ interp/ 33-8005a. htm)Accumulation/distribution index 133
Accumulation/distribution index
Accumulation/distribution index is a technical analysis indicator intended to relate price and volume in the stock
market.
Formula
This ranges from -1 when the close is the low of the day, to +1 when it's the high. For instance if the close is 3/4 the
way up the range then CLV is +0.5. The accumulation/distribution index adds up volume multiplied by the CLV
factor, ie.
The starting point for the acc/dist total, ie. the zero point, is arbitrary, only the shape of the resulting indicator is
used, not the actual level of the total.
The name accumulation/distribution comes from the idea that during accumulation buyers are in control and the
price will be bid up through the day, or will make a recovery if sold down, in either case more often finishing near
the day's high than the low. The opposite applies during distribution.
The accumulation/distribution index is similar to on balance volume, but acc/dist is based on the close within the
day's range, instead of the close-to-close up or down that the latter uses.
Chaikin oscillator
A Chaikin oscillator is formed by subtracting a 10-day exponential moving average from a 3-day exponential
moving average of the accumulation/distribution index. Being an indicator of an indicator, it can give various sell or
buy signals, depending on the context and other indicators.
Similar indicators
Other Price × Volume indicators:
•Money Flow
•On-balance Volume
•Price and Volume Trend
See also
•Dimensional analysis - explains why volume and price are multiplied (not divided) in such indicatorsMoney Flow Index 134
Money Flow Index
Money Flow Index (MFI) is an oscillator calculated over an N-day period, ranging from 0 to 100, showing money
flow on up days as a percentage of the total of up and down days. Money flow in technical analysis is typical price
multiplied by volume, a kind of approximation to the dollar value of a day's trading.
The calculations are as follows. The typical price for each day is the average of high, low and close,
Money flow is the product of typical price and the volume on that day.
Totals of the money flow amounts over the given N days are then formed. Positive money flow is the total for those
days where the typical price is higher than the previous day's typical price, and negative money flow where below. (If
typical price is unchanged then that day is discarded.) A money ratio is then formed
From which a money flow index ranging from 0 to 100 is formed,
This can be expressed equivalently as follows. This form makes it clearer how the MFI is a percentage,
MFI is used as an oscillator. A value of 80 is generally considered overbought, or a value of 20 oversold.
Divergences between MFI and price action are also considered significant, for instance if price makes a new rally
high but the MFI high is less than its previous high then that may indicate a weak advance, likely to reverse.
It will be noted the MFI is constructed in a similar fashion to the relative strength index. Both look at up days against
total up plus down days, but the scale, i.e. what is accumulated on those days, is volume (or dollar volume
approximation rather) for the MFI, as opposed to price change amounts for the RSI.
It's important to be clear about what "money flow" means. It refers to dollar volume, i.e. the total value of shares
traded. Sometimes finance commentators speak of money "flowing into" a stock, but that expression only refers to
the enthusiasm of buyers (obviously there's never any net money in or out, because for every buyer there's a seller of
the same amount).
For the purposes of the MFI, "money flow", i.e. dollar volume, on an up day is taken to represent the enthusiasm of
buyers, and on a down day to represent the enthusiasm of sellers. An excessive proportion in one direction or the
other is interpreted as an extreme, likely to result in a price reversal.
Similar indicators
Other Price × Volume indicators:
•On-balance Volume
•Price and Volume Trend
•Accumulation/distribution indexOn-balance volume 135
On-balance volume
On-balance volume (OBV) is a technical analysis indicator intended to relate price and volume in the stock market.
OBV is based on a cumulative total volume.[1]
The formula
Application
Total volume for each day is assigned a positive or negative value depending on prices being higher or lower that
day. A higher close results in the volume for that day to get a positive value, while a lower close results in negative
value.[2] So, when prices are going up, OBV should be going up too, and when prices make a new rally high, then
OBV should too. If OBV fails to go past its previous rally high, then this is a negative divergence, suggesting a weak
move.[3]
The technique, originally called "cumulative volume" by Woods and Vignolia, was later named in 1946, "on-balance
volume" by Joseph Granville who popularized the technique in his 1963 book Granville's New Key to Stock Market
Profits[1] . The index can be applied to stocks individually based upon their daily up or down close, or to the market
as a whole, using breadth of market data, i.e. the advance/decline ratio.[1]
OBV is generally used to confirm price moves.[4] The idea is that volume is higher on days where the price move is
in the dominant direction, for example in a strong uptrend more volume on up days than down days.[5]
Similar indicators
Other Price × Volume indicators:
•Money Flow
•Price and Volume Trend
•Accumulation/distribution index
See also
•Dimensional analysis — explains why volume and price are multiplied (not divided) in such indicators
References
[1]Joseph E. Granville, Granville's New Strategy of Daily Stock Market Timing for Maximum Profit, Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1976. ISBN
0-13-363432-9
[2]On Balance Volume ( OBV ) (http:/ / www. oxfordfutures. com/ futures-education/ tech/ on-balance-volume. htm). 22 September 2007.
[3]OBV Behaviorial Limitations and Formulas (http:/ / financial-edu. com/ on-balance-volume-obv. php) at Financial-edu.com.
[4]What Does On-Balance Volume Mean (http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ terms/ o/ onbalancevolume. asp)
[5]StockCharts.com article on On Balance Volume (http:/ / stockcharts. com/ education/ IndicatorAnalysis/ indic-OBV. htm)Volume Price Trend 136
Volume Price Trend
Volume Price Trend (VPT) (sometimes Price Volume Trend) is a technical analysis indicator intended to relate
price and volume in the stock market. VPT is based on a running cumulative volume that adds or subtracts a multiple
of the percentage change in share price trend and current volume, depending upon their upward or downward
movements.[1]
Formula
The starting point for the VPT total, i.e. the zero point, is arbitrary. Only the shape of the resulting indicator is used,
not the actual level of the total.
VPT is similar to On-balance Volume (OBV),[2] but where OBV takes volume just according to whether the close
was higher or lower, VPT includes how much higher or lower it was.
VPT is interpreted in similar ways to OBV. Generally, the idea is that volume is higher on days with a price move in
the dominant direction, for example in a strong uptrend more volume on up days than down days. So, when prices
are going up, VPT should be going up too, and when prices make a new rally high, VPT should too. If VPT fails to
go past its previous rally high then this is a negative divergence, suggesting a weak move.
Similar indicators
Other Price × Volume indicators:
•Money Flow Index
•On-balance Volume
•Accumulation/distribution index
References
[1]Volume Price Trend Indicator - VPT (http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ terms/ v/ vptindicator. asp)
[2]Price/Volume Trend (http:/ / www. gannalyst. com/ Gannalyst_Professional/ Gannalyst_Indicators_Price_Volume_Trend. shtml)
External links
•STEP3_Tutorial (https:/ / www. psg-online. co. za/ Documentation/ Webdocs/ Education/ STEP3_Tutorial. ppt)
•OUTPERFORMANCE WITH TECHNICAL ANALYSIS? — AN INTRADAY STUDY ON THE SWISS
STOCK MARKET (http:/ / www. sbf. unisg. ch/ org/ sbf/ web. nsf/ SysWebRessources/
AmmannRekatevonWyss04/ $FILE/ TechAnalysis. pdf)Force Index 137
Force Index
The Force Index (FI) is an indicator used in technical analysis to illustrate how strong the actual buying or selling
pressure is. High positive values mean there is a strong rising trend, and low values signify a strong downward trend.
The FI is calculated by multiplying the difference between the last and previous closing prices by the volume of the
commodity, yielding a momentum scaled by the volume. The strength of the force is determined by a larger price
change or by a larger volume.
The FI was created by Alexander Elder.
Negative volume index
Nearly 75 years have passed since Paul L. Dysart, Jr. invented the Negative Volume Index and Positive Volume
Index indicators. The indicators remain useful to identify primary market trends and reversals.
In 1936, Paul L. Dysart, Jr. began accumulating two series of advances and declines distinguished by whether
volume was greater or lesser than the prior day’s volume. He called the cumulative series for the days when volume
had been greater than the prior day’s volume the Positive Volume Index (PVI), and the series for the days when
volume had been lesser the Negative Volume Index (NVI).
A native of Iowa, Dysart worked in Chicago’s LaSalle Street during the 1920s. After giving up his Chicago Board of
Trade membership, he published an advisory letter geared to short-term trading using advance-decline data. In 1933,
he launched the Trendway weekly stock market letter and published it until 1969 when he died. Dysart also
developed the 25-day Plurality Index, the 25-day total of the absolute difference between the number of advancing
issues and the number of declining issues, and was a pioneer in using several types of volume of trading studies.
Dysart’s NVI and PVI
The daily volume of the New York Stock Exchange and the NYSE Composite Index’s advances and declines drove
Dysart’s indicators. Dysart believed that “volume is the driving force in the market.” He began studying market
breath numbers in 1931, and was familiar with the work of Col. Leonard P. Ayres and James F. Hughes, who
pioneered the tabulation of advances and declines to interpret stock market movements.
Dysart calculated NVI as follows: 1) if today’s volume is less than yesterday’s volume, subtract declines from
advances, 2) add the difference to the cumulative NVI beginning at zero, and 3) retain the current NVI reading for
the days when volume is greater than the prior day’s volume. He calculated PVI in the same manner but for the days
when volume was greater than the prior day’s volume. NVI and PVI can be calculated daily or weekly.
Initially, Dysart believed that PVI would be the more useful series, but in 1967, he wrote that NVI had “proved to be
the most valuable of all the breath indexes.” He relied most on NVI, naming it AMOMET, the acronym of “A
Measure Of Major Economic Trend.”
Dysart’s theory, expressed in his 1967 Barron's article, was that “if volume advances and prices move up or down in
accordance [with volume], the move is assumed to be a good movement - if it is sustained when the volume
subsides.” In other words, after prices have moved up on positive volume days, "if prices stay up when the volume
subsides for a number of days, we can say that such a move is 'good'." If the market “holds its own on negative
volume days after advancing on positive volume, the market is in a strong position.”
He called PVI the “majority” curve. Dysart distinguished between the actions of the “majority” and those of the
“minority.” The majority tends to emulate the minority, but its timing is not as sharp as that of the minority. When
the majority showed an appetite for stocks, the PVI was usually “into new high ground” as happened in 1961.Negative volume index 138
It is said that the two indicators assume that "smart" money is traded on quiet days (low volume) and that the crowd
trades on very active days. Therefore, the negative volume index picks out days when the volume is lower than on
the previous day, and the positive index picks out days with a higher volume.
Dysart’s Interpretation of NVI and PVI
Besides an article he wrote for Barron’s in 1967, not many of Dysart’s writings are available. What can be interpreted
about Dysart’s NVI is that whenever it rises above a prior high, and the DJIA is trending up, a “Bull Market Signal”
is given. When the NVI falls below a prior low, and the DJIA is trending down, a “Bear Market Signal” is given. The
PVI is interpreted in reverse. However, not all movements above or below a prior NVI or PVI level generate signals,
as Dysart also designated “bullish” and “bearish penetrations.” These penetrations could occur before or after a Bull
or Bear Market Signal, and at times were called “reaffirmations” of a signal. In 1969, he articulated one rule: “signals
are most authentic when the NVI has moved sideways for a number of months in a relatively narrow range.” Dysart
cautioned that “there is no mathematical system devoid of judgment which will continuously work without error in
the stock market.”
According to Dysart, between 1946 and 1967, the NVI “rendered 17 significant signals,” of which 14 proved to be
right (an average of 4.32% from the final high or low) and 3 wrong (average loss of 6.33%). However, NVI
“seriously erred” in 1963-1964 and in 1968, which concerned him. In 1969, Dysart reduced the weight he had
previously given to the NVI in his analyses because NVI was no longer a “decisive” indicator of the primary trend,
although it retained an “excellent ability to give us ‘leading’ indications of short-term trend reversals.”
A probable reason for the NVI losing its efficacy during the mid-1960s may have been the steadily higher NYSE
daily volume due to the dramatic increase in the number of issues traded so that prices rose on declining volume.
Dysart’s NVI topped out in 1955 and trended down until at least 1968, although the DJIA moved higher during that
period. Norman G. Fosback has attributed the “long term increase in the number of issues traded” as a reason for a
downward bias in a cumulative advance-decline line. Fosback was the next influential technician in the story of NVI
and PVI.
Fosback’s Variations
Fosback studied NVI and PVI and in 1976 reported his findings in his classic Stock Market Logic. He did not
elucidate on the indicators’ background or mentioned Dysart except for saying that “in the past Negative Volume
Indexes have always [his emphasis] been constructed using advance-decline data….” He posited, “There is no good
reason for this fixation on the A/D Line. In truth, a Negative Volume Index can be calculated with any market index
- the Dow Jones Industrial Average, the S&P 500, or even ‘unweighted’ market measures…. Somehow this point has
escaped the attention of technicians to date.”
The point had not been lost on Dysart, who wrote in Barron’s, “we prefer to use the issues-traded data [advances and
declines] rather than the price data of any average because it is more all-encompassing, and more truly represents
what’s happening in the entire market.” Dysart was a staunch proponent of using advances and declines.
Fosback made three variations to NVI and PVI:
1. He cumulated the daily percent change in the market index rather than the difference between advances and
declines. On negative volume days, he calculated the price change in the index from the prior day and added it to the
most recent NVI. His calculations are as follows:
If Ct and Cy denote the closing prices of today and yesterday, respectively, the NVI for today is calculated by
•adding NVIyesterday (Ct - Cy) / Cy to yesterday's NVI if today's volume is lower than yesterday's, adding zero
otherwise,
and the PVI is calculated by:Negative volume index 139
•adding PVIyesterday (Ct - Cy) / Cy to yesterday's PVI if today's volume is higher than yesterday's, adding zero
otherwise.
2. He suggested starting the cumulative count at a base index level such as 100.
3. He derived buy or sell signals by whether the NVI or PVI was above or below its one-year moving average.
Fosback’s versions of NVI and PVI are what are popularly described in books and posted on Internet financial sites.
Often reported are his findings that whenever NVI is above its one-year moving average there is a 96% (PVI - 79%)
probability that a bull market is in progress, and when it is below its one-year moving average, there is a 53% (PVI -
67%) probability that a bear market is in place. These results were derived using a 1941-1975 test period. Modern
tests might reveal different probabilities.
Today, NVI and PVI are commonly associated with Fosback’s versions, and Dysart, their inventor, is forgotten. It
cannot be said that one version is better than the other. While Fosback provided a more objective interpretation of
these indicators, Dysart’s versions offer value to identify primary trends and short-term trend reversals.
Although some traders use Fosback’s NVI and PVI to analyze individual stocks, the indicators were created to track,
and have been tested, on major market indexes. NVI was Dysart’s most invaluable breath index, and Fosback found
that his version of “the Negative Volume Index is an excellent indicator of the primary market trend.” Traders can
benefit from both innovations.
References
•Appel, Gerald, Winning Market Systems, pp. 42–44, Windsor Books, Bridgewaters, New York (1989)
•Dysart, Jr., Paul L., Bear Market Signal?: A Sensitive Breath Index Has Just Flashed One, Barron's (newspaper)
(Sept. 4, 1967)
•Fosback, Norman G., Stock Market Logic: A Sophisticated Approach to Profits on Wall Street, pp. 120–124,
Deaborn Financial Printing, Chicago, Illinois (1993)
•Market Technicians Association, Paul L. Dysart, Jr. Annual Award (1990, ed. James E. Alphier)
•Schade, Jr., George A., Traders Adjust the Volume Indicators, Stocks Futures and Options Magazine (Nov. 2005)Ease of movement 140
Ease of movement
Ease of movement is an indicator used in technical analysis to relate an asset's price change to its volume. Ease of
Movement was developed by Richard W. Arms, Jr and highlights the relationship between volume and price changes
and is particularly useful for assessing the strength of a trend[1] . High positive values indicate the price is increasing
on low volume: strong negative values indicate the price is dropping on low volume. The moving average of the
indicator can be added to act as a trigger line, which is similar to other indicators like the MACD[2] .
References
[1]Arms Ease of Movement (http:/ / www. oxfordfutures. com/ futures-education/ tech/ ease-of-movement. htm), , retrieved 17 February 2008
[2]Financial dictionary.reference (http:/ / dictionary. reference. com/ browse/ ease of movement)141
INDICATORS: Volatility
Volatility (finance)
In finance, volatility most frequently refers to the standard deviation of the continuously compounded returns of a
financial instrument within a specific time horizon. It is common for discussions to talk about the volatility of a
security's price, even while it is the returns' volatility that is being measured. It is used to quantify the risk of the
financial instrument over the specified time period. Volatility is normally expressed in annualized terms, and it may
either be an absolute number ($5) or a fraction of the mean (5%).
Volatility terminology
Volatility as described here refers to the actual current volatility of a financial instrument for a specified period (for
example 30 days or 90 days). It is the volatility of a financial instrument based on historical prices over the specified
period with the last observation the most recent price. This phrase is used particularly when it is wished to
distinguish between the actual current volatility of an instrument and
•actual historical volatility which refers to the volatility of a financial instrument over a specified period but with
the last observation on a date in the past
•actual future volatility which refers to the volatility of a financial instrument over a specified period starting at
the current time and ending at a future date (normally the expiry date of an option)
•historical implied volatility which refers to the implied volatility observed from historical prices of the financial
instrument (normally options)
•current implied volatility which refers to the implied volatility observed from current prices of the financial
instrument
•future implied volatility which refers to the implied volatility observed from future prices of the financial
instrument
For a financial instrument whose price follows a Gaussian random walk, or Wiener process, the width of the
distribution increases as time increases. This is because there is an increasing probability that the instrument's price
will be farther away from the initial price as time increases. However, rather than increase linearly, the volatility
increases with the square-root of time as time increases, because some fluctuations are expected to cancel each other
out, so the most likely deviation after twice the time will not be twice the distance from zero.
Since observed price changes do not follow Gaussian distributions, others such as the Lévy distribution are often
used.[1] These can capture attributes such as "fat tails".
Volatility for investors
Investors care about volatility for five reasons. 1) The wider the swings in an investment's price the harder
emotionally it is to not worry. 2) When certain cash flows from selling a security are needed at a specific future date,
higher volatility means a greater chance of a shortfall. 3) Higher volatility of returns while saving for retirement
results in a wider distribution of possible final portfolio values. 4) Higher volatility of return when retired gives
withdrawals a larger permanent impact on the portfolio's value. 5) Price volatility presents opportunities to buy assets
cheaply and sell when overpriced. [2]
In today's markets, it is also possible to trade volatility directly, through the use of derivative securities such as
options and variance swaps. See Volatility arbitrage.Volatility (finance) 142
Volatility versus direction
Volatility does not measure the direction of price changes, merely their dispersion. This is because when calculating
standard deviation (or variance), all differences are squared, so that negative and positive differences are combined
into one quantity. Two instruments with different volatilities may have the same expected return, but the instrument
with higher volatility will have larger swings in values over a given period of time.
For example, a lower volatility stock may have an expected (average) return of 7%, with annual volatility of 5%.
This would indicate returns from approximately -3% to 17% most of the time (19 times out of 20, or 95%). A higher
volatility stock, with the same expected return of 7% but with annual volatility of 20%, would indicate returns from
approximately -33% to 47% most of the time (19 times out of 20, or 95%). These estimates assume a normal
distribution; in reality stocks are found to be leptokurtotic.
Volatility is a poor measure of risk, as explained by Peter Carr, "it is only a good measure of risk if you feel that
being rich then being poor is the same as being poor then rich".
Volatility over time
Although the Black Scholes equation assumes predictable constant volatility, none of these are observed in real
markets, and amongst the models are Bruno Dupire's Local Volatility, Poisson Process where volatility jumps to new
levels with a predictable frequency, and the increasingly popular Heston model of Stochastic Volatility.[3]
It's common knowledge that types of assets experience periods of high and low volatility. That is, during some
periods prices go up and down quickly, while during other times they might not seem to move at all.
Periods when prices fall quickly (a crash) are often followed by prices going down even more, or going up by an
unusual amount. Also, a time when prices rise quickly (a bubble) may often be followed by prices going up even
more, or going down by an unusual amount.
The converse behavior, 'doldrums' can last for a long time as well.
Most typically, extreme movements do not appear 'out of nowhere'; they're presaged by larger movements than
usual. This is termed autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity. Of course, whether such large movements have
the same direction, or the opposite, is more difficult to say. And an increase in volatility does not always presage a
further increase—the volatility may simply go back down again.
Mathematical definition
The annualized volatility σ is the standard deviation of the instrument's yearly logarithmic returns.
The generalized volatility σT for time horizon T in years is expressed as:
Therefore, if the daily logarithmic returns of a stock have a standard deviation of σSD and the time period of returns
is P, the annualized volatility is
A common assumption is that P = 1/252 (there are 252 trading days in any given year). Then, if σSD = 0.01 the
annualized volatility is
The monthly volatility (i.e., T = 1/12 of a year) would be
Volatility (finance) 143
The formula used above to convert returns or volatility measures from one time period to another assume a particular
underlying model or process. These formulas are accurate extrapolations of a random walk, or Wiener process,
whose steps have finite variance. However, more generally, for natural stochastic processes, the precise relationship
between volatility measures for different time periods is more complicated. Some use the Lévy stability exponent α
to extrapolate natural processes:
If α = 2 you get the Wiener process scaling relation, but some people believe α < 2 for financial activities such as
stocks, indexes and so on. This was discovered by Benoît Mandelbrot, who looked at cotton prices and found that
they followed a Lévy alpha-stable distribution with α = 1.7. (See New Scientist, 19 April 1997.)
Crude volatility estimation
Using a simplification of the formulas above it is possible to estimate annualized volatility based solely on
approximate observations. Suppose you notice that a market price index, which has a current value near 10,000, has
moved about 100 points a day, on average, for many days. This would constitute a 1% daily movement, up or down.
To annualize this, you can use the "rule of 16", that is, multiply by 16 to get 16% as the annual volatility. The
rationale for this is that 16 is the square root of 256, which is approximately the number of trading days in a year
(252). This also uses the fact that the standard deviation of the sum of n independent variables (with equal standard
deviations) is √n times the standard deviation of the individual variables.
Of course, the average magnitude of the observations is merely an approximation of the standard deviation of the
market index. Assuming that the market index daily changes are normally distributed with mean zero and standard
deviation σ, the expected value of the magnitude of the observations is √(2/π)σ = 0.798σ. The net effect is that this
crude approach overestimates the true volatility by about 25%.
Estimate of compound annual growth rate (CAGR)
Consider the Taylor series:
Taking only the first two terms one has:
Realistically, most financial assets have negative skewness and leptokurtosis, so this formula tends to be
over-optimistic. Some people use the formula:
for a rough estimate, where k is an empirical factor (typically five to ten).
See also
•Beta (finance)
•Derivative (finance)
•Financial economics
•Implied volatility
•IVX
•Risk
•Standard deviation
•Stochastic volatility
•Volatility arbitrageVolatility (finance) 144
•Volatility smile
References
[1]http:/ / www. wilmottwiki. com/ wiki/ index. php/ Levy_distribution
[2]Investment Risks - Price Volatility (http:/ / www. retailinvestor. org/ risk. html#volatility)
[3]http:/ / www. wilmottwiki. com/ wiki/ index. php/ Volatility#Definitions
•Lin Chen (1996). Stochastic Mean and Stochastic Volatility – A Three-Factor Model of the Term Structure of
Interest Rates and Its Application to the Pricing of Interest Rate Derivatives. Blackwell Publishers.
External links
•Complex Options (http:/ / www. optionistics. com/ f/ strategy_calculator) Multi-Leg Option Strategy Calculator
•An introduction to volatility and how it can be calculated in excel, by Dr A. A. Kotzé (http:/ / quantonline. co. za/
Articles/ article_volatility. htm)
•Interactive Java Applet " What is Historic Volatility? (http:/ / www. frog-numerics. com/ ifs/ ifs_LevelA/
HistVolaBasic. html)"
•Diebold, Francis X.; Hickman, Andrew; Inoue, Atsushi & Schuermannm, Til (1996) "Converting 1-Day
Volatility to h-Day Volatility: Scaling by sqrt(h) is Worse than You Think" (http:/ / citeseer. ist. psu. edu/ 244698.
html)
•A short introduction to alternative mathematical concepts of volatility (http:/ / staff. science. uva. nl/ ~marvisse/
volatility. html)
Average True Range
Average True Range (ATR) is a technical analysis volatility indicator originally developed by J. Welles Wilder, Jr.
for commodities[1] . The indicator does not provide an indication of price trend, simply the degree of price
volatility.[2] The average true range is an N-day exponential moving average of the true range values. Wilder
recommended a 14-period smoothing. [3]
Calculation
The range of a day's trading is simply . The true range extends it to yesterday's closing price if it was
outside of today's range.
The true range is the largest of the:
•Most recent period's high less the most recent period's low
•Absolute value of the most recent period's high less the previous close
•Absolute value of the most recent period's low less the previous close
The idea of ranges is that they show the commitment or enthusiasm of traders. Large or increasing ranges suggest
traders prepared to continue to bid up or sell down a stock through the course of the day. Decreasing range suggests
waning interest.Average True Range 145
References
[1]J. Welles Wilder, Jr. (June 1978). New Concepts in Technical Trading Systems. Greensboro, NC: Trend Research. ISBN 978-0894590276.
[2]ATR Definition - investopedia.com (http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ terms/ a/ atr. asp)
[3]This is by his reckoning of EMA periods, meaning an α=2/(1+14)=0.1333.
External links
•Measure Volatility With Average True Range (http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ articles/ trading/ 08/
average-true-range. asp) at investopedia.com
•Enter Profitable Territory With Average True Range (http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ articles/ trading/ 08/ ATR.
asp) at investopedia.com
•Average True Range (ATR) (http:/ / stockcharts. com/ help/ doku.
php?id=chart_school:technical_indicators:average_true_range_a) at stockcharts.com
Bollinger Bands
S&P 500 with 20 day, two standard deviation Bollinger Bands, %b and BandWidth.
Bollinger Bands is a technical analysis
tool invented by John Bollinger in the
1980s. Having evolved from the
concept of trading bands, Bollinger
Bands can be used to measure the
highness or lowness of the price
relative to previous trades.
Bollinger Bands consist of:
•a middle band being an N-period
simple moving average (MA)
•an upper band at K times an
N-period standard deviation above
the middle band (MA + Kσ)
•a lower band at K times an N-period
standard deviation below the middle
band (MA − Kσ)
Typical values for N and K are 20 and
2, respectively. The default choice for the average is a simple moving average, but other types of averages can be
employed as needed. Exponential moving averages are a common second choice. [1] Usually the same period is used
for both the middle band and the calculation of standard deviation.[2]Bollinger Bands 146
Purpose
The purpose of Bollinger Bands is to provide a relative definition of high and low. By definition, prices are high at
the upper band and low at the lower band. This definition can aid in rigorous pattern recognition and is useful in
comparing price action to the action of indicators to arrive at systematic trading decisions.[3]
Indicators derived from Bollinger Bands
There are two indicators derived from Bollinger Bands, %b and BandWidth.
%b, pronounced 'percent b', is derived from the formula for Stochastics and tells you where you are in relation to the
bands. %b equals 1 at the upper band and 0 at the lower band. Writing upperBB for the upper Bollinger Band,
lowerBB for the lower Bollinger Band, and last for the last (price) value:
%b = (last − lowerBB) / (upperBB − lowerBB)
BandWidth tells you how wide the Bollinger Bands are on a normalized basis. Writing the same symbols as before,
and middleBB for the moving average, or middle Bollinger Band:
BandWidth = (upperBB − lowerBB) / middleBB
Using the default parameters of a 20-period look back and plus/minus two standard deviations, BandWidth is equal
to four times the 20-period coefficient of variation.
Uses for %b include system building and pattern recognition. Uses for BandWidth include identification of
opportunities arising from relative extremes in volatility and trend identification.
In a series of lectures at The World Money Show in Hong Kong, Asian Traders Investment Conference in Singapore,
the Italian Trading Forum in Rimini, Italy, The European Technical Analysis Conference in London, England and
the Market Technicians Symposium in New York, USA, all in Spring of 2010, John Bollinger introduced three new
indicators based on Bollinger Bands. They are BB Impulse, which measures price change as a function of the bands,
BandWidth Percent, which normalizes the width of the bands over time, and BandWidth Delta, which quantifies the
changing width of the bands.
Interpretation
The use of Bollinger Bands varies widely among traders. Some traders buy when price touches the lower Bollinger
Band and exit when price touches the moving average in the center of the bands. Other traders buy when price
breaks above the upper Bollinger Band or sell when price falls below the lower Bollinger Band.[4] Moreover, the use
of Bollinger Bands is not confined to stock traders; options traders, most notably implied volatility traders, often sell
options when Bollinger Bands are historically far apart or buy options when the Bollinger Bands are historically
close together, in both instances, expecting volatility to revert back towards the average historical volatility level for
the stock.
When the bands lie close together a period of low volatility in stock price is indicated. When they are far apart a
period of high volatility in price is indicated. When the bands have only a slight slope and lie approximately parallel
for an extended time the price of a stock will be found to oscillate up and down between the bands as though in a
channel.
Traders are often inclined to use Bollinger Bands with other indicators to see if there is confirmation. In particular,
the use of an oscillator like Bollinger Bands will often be coupled with a non-oscillator indicator like chart patterns
or a trendline; if these indicators confirm the recommendation of the Bollinger Bands, the trader will have greater
evidence that what the bands forecast is correct.Bollinger Bands 147
Effectiveness
A recent study concluded that Bollinger Band trading strategies may be effective in the Chinese marketplace, stating:
"Finally, we find significant positive returns on buy trades generated by the contrarian version of the moving average
crossover rule, the channel breakout rule, and the Bollinger Band trading rule, after accounting for transaction costs
of 0.50 percent." Nauzer J. Balsara, Gary Chen and Lin Zheng The Chinese Stock Market: An Examination of the
Random Walk Model and Technical Trading Rules.[5] (By "the contrarian version", they mean buying when the
conventional rule mandates selling, and vice versa.)
A paper by Rostan, Pierre, Théoret, Raymond and El moussadek, Abdeljalil from 2008 at SSRN uses Bollinger
Bands in forecasting the yield curve.[6]
In his 2006 master's thesis, Oliver Douglas Williams at the University of Western Ontario studied Bollinger Bands
and suggested that fundamental analysis was key to setting Bollinger Band parameters, a process John Bollinger
dubbed rational analysis. Williams concluded: "Alone, Bollinger Bands do not seem to yield the extraordinary
results. Fundamental analysis is required to determine the best moving average window to match the business cycle
of the asset. When combined with other techniques such as fundamental analysis, Bollinger Bands can give
systematic traders a method of choosing their buy and sell points."[7]
Companies like Forbes suggest that the use of Bollinger Bands is a simple and often an effective strategy but
stop-loss orders should be used to mitigate losses from market pressure.[8]
Statistical properties
Security prices have no known statistical distribution, normal or otherwise; they are known to have fat tails,
compared to the Normal.[9] The sample size typically used, 20, is too small for conclusions derived from statistical
techniques like the Central Limit Theorem to be reliable. Such techniques usually require the sample to be
independent and identically distributed which is not the case for a time series like security prices.
For these three primary reasons, it is incorrect to assume that the percentage of the data outside the Bollinger Bands
will always be limited to a certain amount. So, instead of finding about 95% of the data inside the bands, as would be
the expectation with the default parameters if the data were normally distributed, one will typically find less; how
much less is a function of the security's volatility.
Bollinger Bands outside of finance
In a paper published in 2006 by the Society of Photo-Optical Engineers, "Novel method for patterned fabric
inspection using Bollinger Bands", Henry Y. T. Ngan and Grantham K. H. Pang present a method of using Bollinger
Bands to detect defects in patterned fabrics. From the abstract: "In this paper, the upper band and lower band of
Bollinger Bands, which are sensitive to any subtle change in the input data, have been developed for use to indicate
the defective areas in patterned fabric."[10]
The International Civil Aviation Organization is using Bollinger Bands to measure the accident rate as a safety
indicator to measure efficiency of global safety initiatives.[11] %b and BandWidth are also used in this analysis.Bollinger Bands 148
Notes
[1]When the average used in the calculation of Bollinger Bands is changed from a simple moving average to an exponential or weighted moving
average, it must be changed for both the calculation of the middle band and the calculation of standard deviation.Bollinger On Bollinger
Bands – The Seminar, DVD I ISBN 978-0-9726111-0-7
[2]Bollinger Bands use the population method of calculating standard deviation, thus the proper divisor for the sigma calculation is n, not n − 1.
[3](http:/ / www. bollingerbands. com) second paragraph, center column
[4]Technical Analysis: The Complete Resource for Financial Market Technicians by Charles D. Kirkpatrick and Julie R. Dahlquist Chapter 14
[5](http:/ / findarticles. com/ p/ articles/ mi_qa5466/ is_200704/ ai_n21292807/ pg_1?tag=artBody;col1) The Quarterly Journal of Business and
Economics, Spring 2007
[6](http:/ / papers. ssrn. com/ sol3/ papers. cfm?abstract_id=671581) Forecasting the Interest-Rate Term Structure at SSRN
[7](http:/ / ir. lib. sfu. ca/ retrieve/ 3836/ etd2519. pdf) Empirical Optimization of Bollinger Bands for Profitability
[8]Bollinger Band Trading John Devcic 05.11.07 (http:/ / www. forbes. com/ 2007/ 05/ 11/
bollinger-intel-yahoo-pf-education-in_jd_0511chartroom_inl. html)
[9]Rachev; Svetlozar T., Menn, Christian; Fabozzi, Frank J. (2005), Fat Tailed and Skewed Asset Return Distributions, Implications for Risk
Management, Portfolio Selection, and Option Pricing, John Wiley, New York
[10] (http:/ / spiedl. aip. org/ getabs/ servlet/ GetabsServlet?prog=normal& id=OPEGAR000045000008087202000001& idtype=cvips&
gifs=yes) Optical Engineering, Volume 45, Issue 8
[11] (http:/ / www. skybrary. aero/ index. php/ ICAO_Methodology_for_Accident_Rate_Calculation_and_Trending) ICAO Methodology for
Accident Rate Calculation and Trending on SKYbary
References
Further reading
•Achelis, Steve. Technical Analysis from A to Z (pp. 71–73). Irwin, 1995. ISBN 978-0-07-136348-8
•Bollinger, John. Bollinger on Bollinger Bands. McGraw Hill, 2002. ISBN 978-0-07-137368-5
•Cahen, Philippe. Dynamic Technical Analysis. Wiley, 2001. ISBN 978-0-471-89947-1
•Kirkpatrick, Charles D. II; Dahlquist, Julie R. Technical Analysis: The Complete Resource for Financial Market
Technicians, FT Press, 2006. ISBN 0-13-153113-1
•Murphy, John J. Technical Analysis of the Financial Markets (pp. 209–211). New York Institute of Finance,
1999. ISBN 0-7352-0066-1
External links
•John Bollinger's website (http:/ / www. bollingerbands. com)
•John Bollinger's website on Bollinger Band analysis (http:/ / www. bollingeronbollingerbands. com)
•December 2008 Los Angeles Times profile of John Bollinger (http:/ / www. latimes. com/ business/
la-fi-himi7-2008dec07,0,1338099. story)Donchian channel 149
Donchian channel
The Donchian channel is an indicator used in market trading developed by Richard Donchian. It is formed by taking
the highest high of the daily maxima and the lowest low of the daily minima of the last n days, then marking the area
between those values on a chart.
The Donchian channel is a useful indicator for seeing the volatility of a market price. If a price is stable the
Donchian channel will be relatively narrow. If the price fluctuates a lot the Donchian channel will be wider. Its
primary use, however, is for providing signals for long and short positions. If a security trades above its highest n
day high, then a long is established. If it trades below its lowest n day low, then a short is established.
See also
•Bollinger bands
•Financial modeling
External links
•Using the Donchian Channel in Trading [1]
•Capture Profits using Bands and Channels [2]
References
[1]http:/ / www. indicatorforex. com/ content/ using-donchian-bands
[2]http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ articles/ forex/ 06/ BandsChannels. asp
Standard deviation
A plot of a normal distribution (or bell curve). Each colored band has a width of one
standard deviation.
Standard deviation is a widely used
measurement of variability or diversity
used in statistics and probability
theory. It shows how much variation or
"dispersion" there is from the
"average" (mean, or expected/budgeted
value). A low standard deviation
indicates that the data points tend to be
very close to the mean, whereas high
standard deviation indicates that the
data are spread out over a large range
of values.
Technically, the standard deviation of
a statistical population, data set, or probability distribution is the square root of its variance. It is algebraically
simpler though practically less robust than the average absolute deviation.[1]Standard deviation 150
Cumulative probability of a normal distribution
with expected value 0 and standard deviation 1
A data set with a mean of 50 (shown in blue) and
a standard deviation (σ) of 20.
Example of two sample populations with the
same mean and different standard deviations. Red
population has mean 100 and SD 10; blue
population has mean 100 and SD 50.
[2] A useful property of standard deviation is that, unlike variance, it is
expressed in the same units as the data. Note, however, that for
measurements with percentage as unit, the standard deviation will have
percentage points as unit.
In addition to expressing the variability of a population, standard
deviation is commonly used to measure confidence in statistical
conclusions. For example, the margin of error in polling data is
determined by calculating the expected standard deviation in the results
if the same poll were to be conducted multiple times. The reported
margin of error is typically about twice the standard deviation – the
radius of a 95 percent confidence interval. In science, researchers
commonly report the standard deviation of experimental data, and only
effects that fall far outside the range of standard deviation are
considered statistically significant – normal random error or variation
in the measurements is in this way distinguished from causal variation.
Standard deviation is also important in finance, where the standard
deviation on the rate of return on an investment is a measure of the
volatility of the investment.
When only a sample of data from a population is available, the
population standard deviation can be estimated by a modified quantity
called the sample standard deviation, explained below.
Basic examples
Consider a population consisting of the following eight values:
These eight data points have the mean (average) of 5:
To calculate the population standard deviation, first compute the difference of each data point from the mean, and
square the result of each:Standard deviation 151
Next compute the average of these values, and take the square root:
This quantity is the population standard deviation; it is equal to the square root of the variance. The formula is
valid only if the eight values we began with form the complete population. If they instead were a random sample,
drawn from some larger,  “parent” population, then we should have used 7 (n − 1) instead of 8 (n) in the denominator
of the last formula, and then the quantity thus obtained would have been called the sample standard deviation. See
the section Estimation below for more details.
A slightly more complicated real life example, the average height for adult men in the United States is about 70",
with a standard deviation of around 3". This means that most men (about 68%, assuming a normal distribution) have
a height within 3" of the mean (67"–73") — one standard deviation — and almost all men (about 95%) have a height
within 6" of the mean (64"–76") — two standard deviations. If the standard deviation were zero, then all men would
be exactly 70" high. If the standard deviation were 20", then men would have much more variable heights, with a
typical range of about 50"–90". Three standard deviations account for 99.7% of the sample population being studied,
assuming the distribution is normal (bell-shaped).
Definition of population values
Let X be a random variable with mean value μ:
Here the operator E denotes the average or expected value of X. Then the standard deviation of X is the quantity
That is, the standard deviation σ (sigma) is the square root of the average value of (X − μ)2.
The standard deviation of a (univariate) probability distribution is the same as that of a random variable having that
distribution. Not all random variables have a standard deviation, since these expected values need not exist. For
example, the standard deviation of a random variable that follows a Cauchy distribution is undefined because its
expected value μ is undefined.
Discrete random variable
In the case where X takes random values from a finite data set x1, x2, …, xN, with each value having the same
probability, the standard deviation is
or, using summation notation,
If, instead of having equal probabilities, the values have different probabilities, let x1 have probability p1, x2 have
probability p2, ..., xN have probability pN. In this case, the standard deviation will beStandard deviation 152
Continuous random variable
The standard deviation of a continuous real-valued random variable X with probability density function p(x) is
where
and where the integrals are definite integrals taken for x ranging over the set of possible values of the random
variable X.
In the case of a parametric family of distributions, the standard deviation can be expressed in terms of the
parameters. For example, in the case of the log-normal distribution with parameters μ and σ2, the standard deviation
is [(exp(σ2) − 1)exp(2μ + σ2)]1/2.
Estimation
One can find the standard deviation of an entire population in cases (such as standardized testing) where every
member of a population is sampled. In cases where that cannot be done, the standard deviation σ is estimated by
examining a random sample taken from the population. Some estimators are given below:
With standard deviation of the sample
An estimator for σ sometimes used is the standard deviation of the sample, denoted by sN and defined as follows:
This estimator has a uniformly smaller mean squared error than the sample standard deviation (see below), and is the
maximum-likelihood estimate when the population is normally distributed. But this estimator, when applied to a
small or moderately sized sample, tends to be too low: it is a biased estimator.
The standard deviation of the sample is the same as the population standard deviation of a discrete random variable
that can assume precisely the values from the data set, where the probability for each value is proportional to its
multiplicity in the data set.
With sample standard deviation
The most common estimator for σ used is an adjusted version, the sample standard deviation, denoted by s and
defined as follows:
where are the observed values of the sample items and is the mean value of these observations.
This correction (the use of N − 1 instead of N) is known as Bessel's correction. The reason for this correction is that
s2 is an unbiased estimator for the variance σ2 of the underlying population, if that variance exists and the sample
values are drawn independently with replacement. However, s is not an unbiased estimator for the standard deviation
σ; it tends to underestimate the population standard deviation.Standard deviation 153
The term standard deviation of the sample is used for the uncorrected estimator (using N) while the term sample
standard deviation is used for the corrected estimator (using N − 1). The denominator N − 1 is the number of degrees
of freedom in the vector of residuals, .
Other estimators
Although an unbiased estimator for σ is known when the random variable is normally distributed, the formula is
complicated and amounts to a minor correction. Moreover, unbiasedness (in this sense of the word) is not always
desirable.
Identities and mathematical properties
The standard deviation is invariant under changes in location, and scales directly with the scale of the random
variable. Thus, for a constant c and random variables X and Y:
The standard deviation of the sum of two random variables can be related to their individual standard deviations and
the covariance between them:
where and stand for variance and covariance, respectively.
The calculation of the sum of squared deviations can be related to moments calculated directly from the data. The
standard deviation of the sample can be computed as:
The sample standard deviation can be computed as:
For a finite population with equal probabilities at all points, we have
Thus, the standard deviation is equal to the square root of (the average of the squares less the square of the average).
See computational formula for the variance for a proof of this fact, and for an analogous result for the sample
standard deviation.
Interpretation and application
A large standard deviation indicates that the data points are far from the mean and a small standard deviation
indicates that they are clustered closely around the mean.
For example, each of the three populations {0, 0, 14, 14}, {0, 6, 8, 14} and {6, 6, 8, 8} has a mean of 7. Their
standard deviations are 7, 5, and 1, respectively. The third population has a much smaller standard deviation than the
other two because its values are all close to 7. In a loose sense, the standard deviation tells us how far from the mean
the data points tend to be. It will have the same units as the data points themselves. If, for instance, the data set {0, 6,
8, 14} represents the ages of a population of four siblings in years, the standard deviation is 5 years.
As another example, the population {1000, 1006, 1008, 1014} may represent the distances traveled by four athletes,
measured in meters. It has a mean of 1007 meters, and a standard deviation of 5 meters.Standard deviation 154
Standard deviation may serve as a measure of uncertainty. In physical science, for example, the reported standard
deviation of a group of repeated measurements should give the precision of those measurements. When deciding
whether measurements agree with a theoretical prediction, the standard deviation of those measurements is of crucial
importance: if the mean of the measurements is too far away from the prediction (with the distance measured in
standard deviations), then the theory being tested probably needs to be revised. This makes sense since they fall
outside the range of values that could reasonably be expected to occur if the prediction were correct and the standard
deviation appropriately quantified. See prediction interval.
Application examples
The practical value of understanding the standard deviation of a set of values is in appreciating how much variation
there is from the "average" (mean).
Climate
As a simple example, consider the average daily maximum temperatures for two cities, one inland and one on the
coast. It is helpful to understand that the range of daily maximum temperatures for cities near the coast is smaller
than for cities inland. Thus, while these two cities may each have the same average maximum temperature, the
standard deviation of the daily maximum temperature for the coastal city will be less than that of the inland city as,
on any particular day, the actual maximum temperature is more likely to be farther from the average maximum
temperature for the inland city than for the coastal one.
Sports
Another way of seeing it is to consider sports teams. In any set of categories, there will be teams that rate highly at
some things and poorly at others. Chances are, the teams that lead in the standings will not show such disparity but
will perform well in most categories. The lower the standard deviation of their ratings in each category, the more
balanced and consistent they will tend to be. Whereas, teams with a higher standard deviation will be more
unpredictable. For example, a team that is consistently bad in most categories will have a low standard deviation. A
team that is consistently good in most categories will also have a low standard deviation. However, a team with a
high standard deviation might be the type of team that scores a lot (strong offense) but also concedes a lot (weak
defense), or, vice versa, that might have a poor offense but compensates by being difficult to score on.
Trying to predict which teams, on any given day, will win, may include looking at the standard deviations of the
various team "stats" ratings, in which anomalies can match strengths vs. weaknesses to attempt to understand what
factors may prevail as stronger indicators of eventual scoring outcomes.
In racing, a driver is timed on successive laps. A driver with a low standard deviation of lap times is more consistent
than a driver with a higher standard deviation. This information can be used to help understand where opportunities
might be found to reduce lap times.
Finance
In finance, standard deviation is a representation of the risk associated with a given security (stocks, bonds, property,
etc.), or the risk of a portfolio of securities (actively managed mutual funds, index mutual funds, or ETFs). Risk is an
important factor in determining how to efficiently manage a portfolio of investments because it determines the
variation in returns on the asset and/or portfolio and gives investors a mathematical basis for investment decisions
(known as mean-variance optimization). The overall concept of risk is that as it increases, the expected return on the
asset will increase as a result of the risk premium earned – in other words, investors should expect a higher return on
an investment when said investment carries a higher level of risk, or uncertainty of that return. When evaluating
investments, investors should estimate both the expected return and the uncertainty of future returns. Standard
deviation provides a quantified estimate of the uncertainty of future returns.Standard deviation 155
For example, let's assume an investor had to choose between two stocks. Stock A over the past 20 years had an
average return of 10 percent, with a standard deviation of 20 percentage points (pp) and Stock B, over the same
period, had average returns of 12 percent but a higher standard deviation of 30 pp. On the basis of risk and return, an
investor may decide that Stock A is the safer choice, because Stock B's additional two percentage points of return is
not worth the additional 10 pp standard deviation (greater risk or uncertainty of the expected return). Stock B is
likely to fall short of the initial investment (but also to exceed the initial investment) more often than Stock A under
the same circumstances, and is estimated to return only two percent more on average. In this example, Stock A is
expected to earn about 10 percent, plus or minus 20 pp (a range of 30 percent to -10 percent), about two-thirds of the
future year returns. When considering more extreme possible returns or outcomes in future, an investor should
expect results of as much as 10 percent plus or minus 60 pp, or a range from 70 percent to −50 percent, which
includes outcomes for three standard deviations from the average return (about 99.7 percent of probable returns).
Calculating the average return (or arithmetic mean) of the return of a security over a given period will generate the
expected return of the asset. For each period, subtracting the expected return from the actual return results in the
difference from the mean. Squaring the difference in each period and taking the average gives the overall variance of
the return of the asset. The larger the variance, the greater risk the security carries. Finding the square root of this
variance will give the standard deviation of the investment tool in question.
Population standard deviation is used to set the width of Bollinger Bands, a widely adopted technical analysis tool.
For example, the upper Bollinger Band is given as x + nσx. The most commonly used value for n is 2; there is about
a five percent chance of going outside, assuming a normal distribution of returns.
Geometric interpretation
To gain some geometric insights, we will start with a population of three values, x1, x2, x3. This defines a point P =
(x1, x2, x3) in R3. Consider the line L = {(r, r, r) : r ∈ R}. This is the "main diagonal" going through the origin. If our
three given values were all equal, then the standard deviation would be zero and P would lie on L. So it is not
unreasonable to assume that the standard deviation is related to the distance of P to L. And that is indeed the case. To
move orthogonally from L to the point P, one begins at the point:
whose coordinates are the mean of the values we started out with. A little algebra shows that the distance between P
and M (which is the same as the orthogonal distance between P and the line L) is equal to the standard deviation of
the vector x1, x2, x3, multiplied by the square root of the number of dimensions of the vector (3 in this case.)
Chebyshev's inequality
An observation is rarely more than a few standard deviations away from the mean. Chebyshev's inequality ensures
that, for all distributions for which the standard deviation is defined, the amount of data within a number of standard
deviations of the mean is at least as much as given in the following table.Standard deviation 156
 Minimum population  Distance from mean 
50% √2
75% 2
89% 3
94% 4
96% 5
97% 6
[3]
Rules for normally distributed data
Dark blue is less than one standard deviation from the mean. For the normal distribution,
this accounts for 68.27 percent of the set; while two standard deviations from the mean
(medium and dark blue) account for 95.45 percent; three standard deviations (light,
medium, and dark blue) account for 99.73 percent; and four standard deviations account
for 99.994 percent. The two points of the curve that are one standard deviation from the
mean are also the inflection points.
The central limit theorem says that the
distribution of an average of many
independent, identically distributed
random variables tends toward the
famous bell-shaped normal distribution
with a probability density function of:
where μ is the expected value of the random variable, σ equals its standard deviation divided by n1/2, and n is the
number of random variables. The standard deviation therefore is simply a scaling variable that adjusts how broad the
curve will be, though it also appears in the normalizing constant.
If a data distribution is approximately normal then the proportion of data values within z standard deviations of the
mean is defined by:
Proportion = 
where is the error function. If a data distribution is approximately normal then about 68 percent of the data values
are within one standard deviation of the mean (mathematically, μ ± σ, where μ is the arithmetic mean), about 95
percent are within two standard deviations (μ ± 2σ), and about 99.7 percent lie within three standard deviations
(μ ± 3σ). This is known as the 68-95-99.7 rule, or the empirical rule.
For various values of z, the percentage of values expected to lie in and outside the symmetric interval, CI = (−zσ, zσ),
are as follows:Standard deviation 157
zσ  Percentage within CI  Percentage outside CI  Fraction outside CI 
 0.674σ  50%  50%  1 / 2 
 1σ 68.2689492% 31.7310508%  1 / 3.1514872
 1.645σ  90%  10%  1 / 10 
 1.960σ  95%  5%  1 / 20 
 2σ 95.4499736% 4.5500264%  1 / 21.977895
 2.576σ  99%  1%  1 / 100 
 3σ 99.7300204% 0.2699796%  1 / 370.398 
 3.2906σ  99.9%  0.1%  1 / 1000 
 4σ 99.993666% 0.006334%  1 / 15,787 
 5σ 99.9999426697% 0.0000573303%  1 / 1744278 
 6σ 99.9999998027% 0.0000001973%  1 / 506,800,000 
 7σ 99.9999999997440% 0.0000000002560%  1 / 390700000000 
Relationship between standard deviation and mean
The mean and the standard deviation of a set of data are usually reported together. In a certain sense, the standard
deviation is a "natural" measure of statistical dispersion if the center of the data is measured about the mean. This is
because the standard deviation from the mean is smaller than from any other point. The precise statement is the
following: suppose x1, ..., xn are real numbers and define the function:
Using calculus or by completing the square, it is possible to show that σ(r) has a unique minimum at the mean:
Variability can also be measured by the coefficient of variation, which is the ratio of the standard deviation to the
mean. It is a dimensionless number.
Often we want some information about the precision of the mean we obtained. We can obtain this by determining the
standard deviation of the sampled mean. The standard deviation of the mean is related to the standard deviation of
the distribution by:
where N is the number of observation in the sample used to estimate the mean. This can easily be proven with:
hence
Standard deviation 158
Resulting in:
Rapid calculation methods
The following two formulas can represent a running (continuous) standard deviation. A set of three power sums s0,
s1, s2 are each computed over a set of N values of x, denoted as x1, ..., xN:
Note that s0 raises x to the zero power, and since x0 is always 1, s0 evaluates to N.
Given the results of these three running summations, the values s0, s1, s2 can be used at any time to compute the
current value of the running standard deviation:
Similarly for sample standard deviation,
In a computer implementation, as the three sj sums become large, we need to consider round-off error, arithmetic
overflow, and arithmetic underflow. The method below calculates the running sums method with reduced rounding
errors:
where A is the mean value.
Sample variance:
Standard variance:
Weighted calculation
When the values xi are weighted with unequal weights wi, the power sums s0, s1, s2 are each computed as:
And the standard deviation equations remain unchanged. Note that s0 is now the sum of the weights and not the
number of samples N.
The incremental method with reduced rounding errors can also be applied, with some additional complexity.
A running sum of weights must be computed:Standard deviation 159
and places where 1/i is used above must be replaced by wi/Wi:
In the final division,
and
where n is the total number of elements, and n' is the number of elements with non-zero weights. The above formulas
become equal to the simpler formulas given above if weights are taken as equal to one.
Combining standard deviations
Population-based statistics
The populations of sets, which may overlap, can be calculated simply as follows:
Standard deviations of non-overlapping (X ∩ Y = ∅) sub-populations can be aggregated as follows if the size (actual
or relative to one another) and means of each are known:
For example, suppose it is known that the average American man has a mean height of 70 inches with a standard
deviation of three inches and that the average American woman has a mean height of 65 inches with a standard
deviation of two inches. Also assume that the number of men, N, is equal to the number of woman. Then the mean
and standard deviation of heights of American adults could be calculated as:
For the more general case of M non-overlapping populations, X1 through XM, and the aggregate population
:Standard deviation 160
where
If the size (actual or relative to one another), mean, and standard deviation of two overlapping populations are
known for the populations as well as their intersection, then the standard deviation of the overall population can still
be calculated as follows:
If two or more sets of data are being added together datapoint by datapoint, the standard deviation of the result can
be calculated if the standard deviation of each data set and the covariance between each pair of data sets is known:
For the special case where no correlation exists between any pair of data sets, then the relation reduces to the
root-mean-square:
Sample-based statistics
Standard deviations of non-overlapping (X ∩ Y = ∅) sub-samples can be aggregated as follows if the actual size and
means of each are known:
For the more general case of M non-overlapping data sets, X1 through XM, and the aggregate data set :
where:
If the size, mean, and standard deviation of two overlapping samples are known for the samples as well as their
intersection, then the standard deviation of the aggregated sample can still be calculated. In general:Standard deviation 161
History
The term standard deviation was first used[4] in writing by Karl Pearson[5] in 1894, following his use of it in lectures.
This was as a replacement for earlier alternative names for the same idea: for example, Gauss used mean error.[6]
References
[1]Gauss, Carl Friedrich (1816). "Bestimmung der Genauigkeit der Beobachtungen". Zeitschrift für Astronomie und verwandt Wissenschaften 1:
187–197.
[2]Walker, Helen (1931). Studies in the History of the Statistical Method. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins Co. pp. 24–25.
[3]Ghahramani, Saeed (2000). Fundamentals of Probability (2nd Edition). Prentice Hall: New Jersey. p. 438.
[4]Dodge, Yadolah (2003). The Oxford Dictionary of Statistical Terms. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-920613-9.
[5]Pearson, Karl (1894). "On the dissection of asymmetrical frequency curves". Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. London, Series A 185: 719–810.
[6]Miller, Jeff. "Earliest Known Uses of Some of the Words of Mathematics" (http:/ / jeff560. tripod. com/ mathword. html). .
External links
•Online Standard Deviation Calculator (http:/ / www. miniwebtool. com/ standard-deviation-calculator/ )
•A Guide to Understanding & Calculating Standard Deviation (http:/ / stats4students. com/ measures-of-spread-3.
php)
•C++ Source Code (http:/ / www. chrisevansdev. com/ rapidlive-statistics/ ) (license free) C++ implementation of
rapid mean, variance and standard deviation calculation
•Interactive Demonstration and Standard Deviation Calculator (http:/ / www. usablestats. com/ tutorials/
StandardDeviation)
•Standard Deviation – an explanation without maths (http:/ / www. techbookreport. com/ tutorials/ stddev-30-secs.
html)
•Standard Deviation, an elementary introduction (http:/ / davidmlane. com/ hyperstat/ A16252. html)
•Standard Deviation, a simpler explanation for writers and journalists (http:/ / www. robertniles. com/ stats/ stdev.
shtml)
•Standard Deviation Calculator (http:/ / invsee. asu. edu/ srinivas/ stdev. html)
•Texas A&M Standard Deviation and Confidence Interval Calculators (http:/ / www. stat. tamu. edu/ ~jhardin/
applets/ )
•The concept of Standard Deviation is shown in this 8-foot-tall (2.4 m) Probability Machine (named Sir Francis)
comparing stock market returns to the randomness of the beans dropping through the quincunx pattern. (http:/ /
www. youtube. com/ watch?v=AUSKTk9ENzg) from Index Funds Advisors IFA.com (http:/ / www. ifa. com)162
INDICATORS: Other
Advance decline line
The Advance/Decline line is a stock market technical indicator used by speculators to measure the number of
individual stocks participating in a market rise or fall. As price changes of large stocks can have a disproportionate
effect on capitalization weighted stock market indices such as the S&P 500, the NYSE Composite Index, and the
NASDAQ Composite index, it can be useful to know how broadly this movement extends into the larger universe of
smaller stocks. Since market indexes represent a group of stocks, they do not present the whole picture of the trading
day and the performance of the market during this day. Though the market indices give an idea about what has
happened during the trading day, advance/decline numbers give an idea about the individual performance of
particular stocks.
The Advance/Decline line is a plot of the cumulative sum of the daily difference between the number of issues
advancing and the number of issues declining in a particular stock market index. Thus it moves up when the index
contains more advancing than declining issues, and moves down when there are more declining than advancing
issues. The formula for ADL is[1] :
A/D Line = (# of Advancing Stocks - # of Declining Stocks) + Yesterday's A/D Line Value
The Advance/Decline Line (ADL) is the most popular of all internal indicators by far[1] .
Divergence
"Divergence" is when the stock market index moves in one direction while the ADL on that index moves in the
opposite direction[2] . If the index moves up while the ADL moves down, the index may be misleading about the true
direction of the overall market, as happened toward the end of the US Dot-com bubble in 1999-2000[3] , when the
indices continued to rally while the ADL diverged downward starting at the beginning of 1999. Such negative
divergence was also seen toward the end of the roaring twenties bull market, during 1972 at the height of the Nifty
Fifty market[4] , and starting in March 2008 before the late-2008 market collapse[5] .
Advance/Decline Numbers Application
There may be cases in which an index reports a gain at the end of the trading day. This gain may be caused by an
increase in a certain number of stocks. However, a significant lead by declining stocks may be observed relative to
the advancing stocks.[6]
However, these results should be interpreted as a decline in the market, no matter that the index has experienced an
increase. Therefore, you should base your judgments regarding the performance of the market on the
advance/decline numbers, not on the performance of a particular index no matter how broad it is.
There have been many cases in which a major increase in an index was not accompanied by an increase in the
advance number. In such a case it is reasonable to conclude that by the end of the trading day the index will decline.
The reverse is also true. For instance, if there is a significant movement in the advance/decline numbers, you can
expect a movement in the different indexes as well.
Additionally, a market that experiences a trend toward either a decline or an advance is highly unlikely to reverse its
movement immediately on the next trading day.Advance decline line 163
Advance/decline numbers can be also used in your daily observations of the trades in order to determine whether a
particular trend is a false or a spot.
Finally, use advance/decline numbers whenever you need to make a judgment on the performance of the market.
These numbers can also give you understanding on the movements of the indexes.
Example of Market Breadth Chart
•NASDAQ Breadth [7]
•DAX Breadth [8]
•FTSE Breadth [9]
•STI Breadth [10]
References
[1]"Market Breadth: Advance/Decline Indicators" (http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ university/ marketbreadth/ marketbreadth3. asp).
Investopedia. 2010. . Retrieved 2010-09-12.
[2]http:/ / www. trade10. com/ advanceDecline. html
[3]http:/ / blogs. stockcharts. com/ chartwatchers/ 2006/ 09/ the-importance-of-the-ny-a-d-line. html
[4]http:/ / www. lewrockwell. com/ orig5/ duffy4. html
[5]http:/ / www. marketoracle. co. uk/ Article4754. html
[6]"Advance/Decline Ratio Basics" (http:/ / www. stock-market-investors. com/ stock-investing-basics/ advance-decline-ratio-basics. html).
Stock-Market-Investors.com. 2008. . Retrieved 2010-09-12.
[7]http:/ / www. livecharts. co. uk/ breadth_charts/ nasdaq_advance_decline. php
[8]http:/ / www. livecharts. co. uk/ breadth_charts/ dax_advance_decline. php
[9]http:/ / www. livecharts. co. uk/ breadth_charts/ ftse_100_advance_decline. php
[10] http:/ / stibreadth. blogspot. com/
Commodity Channel Index
The Commodity Channel Index (CCI) is an oscillator originally introduced by Donald Lambert in an article
published in the October 1980 issue of Commodities magazine (now known as Futures magazine).
Since its introduction, the indicator has grown in popularity and is now a very common tool for traders in identifying
cyclical trends not only in commodities, but also equities and currencies. The CCI can be adjusted to the timeframe
of the market traded on by changing the averaging period.
Calculation
The CCI is calculated as the difference between the typical price of a commodity and its simple moving average,
divided by the mean absolute deviation of the typical price. The index is usually scaled by an inverse factor of 0.015
to provide more readable numbers:
,
where the pt is the , SMA is the simple moving average, and σ is the mean
absolute deviation.
For scaling purposes, Lambert set the constant at 0.015 to ensure that approximately 70 to 80 percent of CCI values
would fall between -100 and +100. The CCI fluctuates above and below zero. The percentage of CCI values that fall
between +100 and -100 will depend on the number of periods used. A shorter CCI will be more volatile with a
smaller percentage of values between +100 and -100. Conversely, the more periods used to calculate the CCI, theCommodity Channel Index 164
higher the percentage of values between +100 and -100.
Interpretation
Traders and investors use the
Commodity Channel Index to help
identify price reversals, price extremes
and trend strength. As with most
indicators, the CCI should be used in
conjunction with other aspects of
technical analysis. CCI fits into the
momentum category of oscillators. In
addition to momentum, volume
indicators and the price chart may also
influence a technical assessment. It is
often used for detecting divergences
from price trends as an
overbought/oversold indicator, and to
draw patterns on it and trade according to those patterns. In this respect, it is similar to bollinger bands, but is
presented as an indicator rather than as overbought/oversold levels.
The CCI typically oscillates above and below a zero line. Normal oscillations will occur within the range of +100
and -100. Readings above +100 imply an overbought condition, while readings below -100 imply an oversold
condition. As with other overbought/oversold indicators, this means that there is a large probability that the price will
correct to more representative levels.
The CCI has seen substantial growth in popularity amongst technical investors; today's traders often use the indicator
to determine cyclical trends in not only commodities, but also equities and currencies.[1]
The CCI, when used in conjunction with other oscillators, can be a valuable tool to identify potential peaks and
valleys in the asset's price, and thus provide investors with reasonable evidence to estimate changes in the direction
of price movement of the asset.[1]
Lambert's trading guidelines for the CCI focused on movements above +100 and below -100 to generate buy and sell
signals. Because about 70 to 80 percent of the CCI values are between +100 and -100, a buy or sell signal will be in
force only 20 to 30 percent of the time. When the CCI moves above +100, a security is considered to be entering into
a strong uptrend and a buy signal is given. The position should be closed when the CCI moves back below +100.
When the CCI moves below -100, the security is considered to be in a strong downtrend and a sell signal is given.
The position should be closed when the CCI moves back above -100.
Since Lambert's original guidelines, traders have also found the CCI valuable for identifying reversals. The CCI is a
versatile indicator capable of producing a wide array of buy and sell signals.
•CCI can be used to identify overbought and oversold levels. A security would be deemed oversold when the CCI
dips below -100 and overbought when it exceeds +100. From oversold levels, a buy signal might be given when
the CCI moves back above -100. From overbought levels, a sell signal might be given when the CCI moved back
below +100.
•As with most oscillators, divergences can also be applied to increase the robustness of signals. A positive
divergence below -100 would increase the robustness of a signal based on a move back above -100. A negative
divergence above +100 would increase the robustness of a signal based on a move back below +100.
•Trend line breaks can be used to generate signals. Trend lines can be drawn connecting the peaks and troughs. 
From oversold levels, an advance above -100 and trend line breakout could be considered bullish. FromCommodity Channel Index 165
overbought levels, a decline below +100 and a trend line break could be considered bearish.[2]
References
[1]Commodity Channel Index (CCI) (http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ terms/ c/ commoditychannelindex. asp) on Investopedia
[2]Commodity Channel Index (CCI) (http:/ / stockcharts. com/ school/ doku. php?id=chart_school:technical_indicators:commodity_channel_in)
on StockCharts.com - ChartSchool
External links
•Commodities & Charts Blog post on CCI (http:/ / cmd-chart. blogspot. com/ 2007/ 04/ cci-index. html)
•Commodities & Charts Blog images on CCI (http:/ / cmd-chart. blogspot. com/ 2007/ 06/ cci-commodities-index.
html)
Coppock curve
The Coppock curve or Coppock indicator is a technical analysis indicator for long-term stock market investors
created by E.S.C. Coppock, first published in Barron's Magazine on October 15, 1962.[1]
The indicator is designed for use on a monthly time scale. It's the sum of a 14-month rate of change and 11-month
rate of change, smoothed by a 10-period weighted moving average.
.
Coppock, the founder of Trendex Research in San Antonio, Texas,[2] was an economist. He had been asked by the
Episcopal Church to identify buying opportunities for long-term investors. He thought market downturns were like
bereavements and required a period of mourning. He asked the church bishops how long that normally took for
people, their answer was 11 to 14 months and so he used those periods in his calculation.[3]
A buy signal is generated when the indicator is below zero and turns upwards from a trough. No sell signals are
generated (that not being its design). The indicator is trend-following, and based on averages, so by its nature it
doesn't pick a market bottom, but rather shows when a rally has become established.
Coppock designed the indicator (originally called the "Trendex Model"[1] ) for the S&P 500 index, and it's been
applied to similar stock indexes like the Dow Jones Industrial Average. It's not regarded as well-suited to commodity
markets, since bottoms there are more rounded than the spike lows found in stocks.[4]
Variations
Although designed for monthly use, a daily calculation over the same period can be made, converting the periods to
294 day and 231 day rate of changes, and a 210 day weighted moving average.[5]
A slightly different version of the indicator is still used by the Investors Chronicle, a British investment magazine.
The main difference is that the Investors Chronicle version does include the sell signals, although it stresses that they
are to be treated with caution. This is because such signals could merely be a dip in a continuing bull market.[6]Coppock curve 166
References
[1]Donald J. Durham Jr. (1964). "An Analysis of Stock Market Indicators" (http:/ / handle. dtic. mil/ 100. 2/ AD480859). Master's thesis, Naval
Postgraduate School. Monterey, California: Defense Technical Information Center. . "The Trendex model first came to the attention of the
author when it was described by E.S.C. Coppock in the 15 October 1962 issue of Barron's."
[2]2001 Interview with John Bollinger (http:/ / www. theforexvillage. com/ Interviews-withTopTraders/ Interview-with-John-Bollinger. html)
from Active Trader magazine via theforexvillage.com
[3]Coppock Indicator (http:/ / www. finance-glossary. com/ terms/ Coppock-Indicator. htm?ginPtrCode=00000& id=2262& PopupMode=) at
the Global-Investor Glossary
[4]Coppock Curve Interpretation page (http:/ / www. topline-charts. com/ Encyclopedia/ coppock_curve_interpretation. htm) at Topline
Investment Graphics
[5]Coppock Indicator page (http:/ / www. incrediblecharts. com/ technical/ coppock_indicator. htm) at Incredible Charts
[6]IC/Coppock: Sell, sell, sell (http:/ / www. investorschronicle. co. uk/ InvestmentGuides/ Shares/ article/ 20070906/
ce752b0c-727f-11dc-baee-00144f2af8e8/ ICCoppock-Sell-sell-sell. jsp) from Investors Chronicle
External links
•MQL5 implementation of Coppock curve (http:/ / www. earnforex. com/ mt5-forex-indicators/ Coppock. mq5)
•VT Trader implemenation of Coppock curve (http:/ / www. vtsystems. com/ resources/ helps/ 0000/
HTML_VTtrader_Help_Manual_1-9/ index. html?ti_coppockcurve. html)
Keltner channel
Keltner channel example
Keltner channel is a technical analysis indicator showing a central
moving average line plus channel lines at a distance above and below.
The indicator is named after Chester W. Keltner (1909-1998) who
described it in his 1960 book How To Make Money in Commodities.
But this name was applied only by those who heard about it from him,
Keltner called it the Ten-Day Moving Average Trading Rule and
indeed made no claim to any originality for the idea.
In Keltner's description the centre line is an 10-day simple moving
average of typical price, where typical price each day is the average of
high, low and close,
The lines above and below are drawn a distance from that centre line, a distance which is the simple moving average
of the past 10 days' trading ranges (ie. range high to low on each day).
The trading strategy is to regard a close above the upper line as a strong bullish signal, or a close below the lower
line as strong bearish sentiment, and buy or sell with the trend accordingly, but perhaps with other indicators to
confirm.
The origin of this idea is uncertain. Keltner was a Chicago grain trader and perhaps it was common knowledge
among traders of the day. Or in the 1930s as a young man Keltner worked for Ralph Ainsworth (1884-1965)
backtested trading systems submitted when Ainsworth offered a substantial prize for a winning strategy, so it could
have been among those. But ideas of channels with fixed-widths go back to the earliest days of charting, so perhaps
applying some averaging is not an enormous leap in any case.
Later authors, such as Linda Bradford Raschke, have published modifications for the Keltner channel, such as 
different averaging periods; or an exponential moving average; or using a multiple of Wilder's average true range 
(ATR) for the bands. These variations have merit, but are often still just called Keltner channel, creating someKeltner channel 167
confusion as to what exactly one gets from an indicator called that.
References
•Titans Of Technical Analysis [1], letter by Don Jones to Technical Analysis of Stocks and Commodities
magazine, February 2003
•Trader.Online.pl - MetaStock Zone - Keltner Channels [2], describing 10-day SMA
•Discovering Keltner Channels and the Chaikin Oscillator [3], article from Investopedia
References
[1]http:/ / web. archive. org/ web/ 20030303192912/ http:/ / www. traders. com/ Documentation/ FEEDbk_docs/ Archive/ 022003/ Letters/
Letters. html
[2]http:/ / trader. online. pl/ MSZ/ e-w-Keltner_Channels. html
[3]http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ articles/ technical/ 03/ 021903. asp
McClellan Oscillator
The McClellan Oscillator is a market breadth indicator used by financial analysts of the New York Stock Exchange
to evaluate the rate of money entering or leaving the market and interpretively indicate overbought or oversold
conditions of the market.[1]
History
Developed by Sherman and Marian McClellan in 1969, the Oscillator is computed using the exponential moving
average (EMA) of the daily ordinal difference of advancing issues (stocks which gained in value) from declining
issues (stocks which fell in value) over 39 trading day and 19 trading day periods.
How it works
The simplified formula for determining the Oscillator is:
The McClellan Summation Index (MSI) is calculated by adding each day's McClellan Oscillator to the previous
day's Summation Index.
By using the Summation Index of the Mcclellan Oscillator, you can judge the markets overall bullishness or
bearishness.
MSI properties
•above zero it is considered to be bullish (positive growth)
•below zero it is considered to be bearish (negative growth)
The Summation Index is oversold at -1000 to -1250 or overbought at 1000 to 1250. [1]
The number of stocks in a stock market determine the dynamic range of the MSI. For the NZSX (one of the smallest
exchanges in the English speaking world) the MSI would probably range between (-50 ... +50), the 19 and 39
constants (used for the US exchanges) would have to be revised. For the NZSX a MSI moving average mechanism
might be needed to smooth out the perturbations of such a small number of traded stocks.McClellan Oscillator 168
References
[1]Illustrative description by McClellan Publications of the McClellan Oscillator (http:/ / www. mcoscillator. com/ Oscillator. html)
External links
•Investopedia description of the McClellan Oscillator (http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ terms/ m/
mcclellanoscillator. asp)
•Current NYSE McClellan Oscillator and Summation Index at StockCharts.com (http:/ / stockcharts. com/ charts/
indices/ McSumNYSE. html)
Ulcer Index
The Ulcer Index is a stock market risk measure or technical analysis indicator devised by Peter Martin in 1987,[1]
and published by him and Byron McCann in their 1989 book The Investors Guide to Fidelity Funds. It's designed as
a measure of volatility, but only volatility in the downward direction, i.e. the amount of drawdown or retracement
occurring over a period.
Other volatility measures like standard deviation treat up and down movement equally, but a trader doesn't mind
upward movement, it's the downside that causes stress and stomach ulcers that the index's name suggests. (The name
pre-dates the discovery, described in the ulcer article, that most gastric ulcers are actually caused by a bacterium.)
The term Ulcer Index has also been used (later) by Steve Shellans, editor and publisher of MoniResearch Newsletter
for a different calculation, also based on the ulcer causing potential of drawdowns.[2] Shellans index is not described
in this article.
Calculation
The index is based on a given past period of N days. Working from oldest to newest a highest price (highest closing
price) seen so-far is maintained, and any close below that is a retracement, expressed as a percentage
For example if the high so far is $5.00 then a price of $4.50 is a retracement of -10%. The first R is always 0, there
being no drawdown from a single price. The quadratic mean (or root mean square) of these values is taken, similar to
a standard deviation calculation.
The squares mean it doesn't matter if the R values are expressed as positives or negatives, both come out as a
positive Ulcer Index.
The calculation is relatively immune to the sampling rate used. It gives similar results when calculated on weekly
prices as it does on daily prices. Martin advises against sampling less often than weekly though, since for instance
with quarterly prices a fall and recovery could take place entirely within such a period and thereby not appear in the
index.Ulcer Index 169
Usage
Martin recommends his index as a measure of risk in various contexts where usually the standard deviation (SD) is
used for that purpose. For example the Sharpe ratio, which rates an investment's excess return (return above a safe
cash rate) against risk, is
The ulcer index can replace the SD to make an Ulcer Performance Index (UPI) or Martin ratio,
In both cases annualized rates of return would be used (net of costs, inclusive of dividend reinvestment, etc.).
The index can also be charted over time and used as a kind of technical analysis indicator, to show stocks going into
ulcer-forming territory (for one's chosen time-frame), or to compare volatility in different stocks.[3] As with the
Sharpe Ratio, a higher value is better than a lower value (investors prefer more return for less risk).
References
[1]Peter Martin's Ulcer Index page (http:/ / www. tangotools. com/ ui/ ui. htm)
[2]Pankin Managed Funds, client newsletter 3rd Quarter 1996, Questions and Answers (http:/ / www. pankin. com/ qa963. htm)
[3]Discovering the Absolute-Breadth Index and the Ulcer Index (http:/ / www. investopedia. com/ articles/ technical/ 03/ 030403. asp) at
Investopedia.com
Further reading
•The Investors Guide to Fidelity Funds, Peter Martin and Byron McCann, John Wiley & Sons, 1989. Now out of
print, but offered for sale in electronic form by Martin at his web site (http:/ / www. tangotools. com/ ui/ igff.
htm).
External links
•Peter Martin's web site (http:/ / www. tangotools. com/ misc/ index. html)Ultimate Oscillator 170
Ultimate Oscillator
The Ultimate Oscillator is a technical analysis oscillator developed by Larry Williams based on a notion of buying
or selling "pressure" represented by where a day's closing price falls within the day's true range.
The calculation starts with "buying pressure", which is the amount by which the close is above the "true low" on a
given day. The true low is the lesser of the given day's trading low and the previous close.
The true range (the same as used in average true range) is the difference between the "true high" and the true low
above. The true high is the greater of the given day's trading high and the previous close.
The total buying pressure over the past 7 days is expressed as a fraction of the total true range over the same period.
If is today, is yesterday, etc, then
The same is done for the past 14 days and past 28 days and the resulting three ratios combined in proportions 4:2:1,
and scaled to make a percentage 0 to 100. The idea of the 7, 14 and 28 day periods is to combine short, intermediate
and longer time frames.
Williams had specific criteria for a buy or sell signal. A buy signal occurs when,
•Bullish divergence between price and the oscillator is observed, meaning prices make new lows but the oscillator
doesn't
•During the divergence the oscillator has fallen below 30.
•The oscillator then rises above its high during the divergence, ie. the high in between the two lows. The buy
trigger is the rise through that high.
The position is closed when the oscillator rises above 70 (considered overbought), or a rise above 50 but then a
fallback through 45.
A sell signal is generated conversely on a bearish divergence above level 70, to be subsequently closed out below 30
(as oversold).
References
•Ultimate Oscillator [1] at StockCharts.com
•Ultimate Oscillator [2] at ChartFilter.com
•The Ultimate Buy Signal [3] , Motley Fool
Further reading
•The Ultimate Oscillator, by Larry Williams, Technical Analysis of Stocks and Commodities magazine V.3:4
(140-141) (introduction [4])Ultimate Oscillator 171
References
[1]http:/ / www. stockcharts. com/ education/ IndicatorAnalysis/ indic_ultimate. html
[2]http:/ / www. chartfilter. com/ reports/ c52. htm
[3]http:/ / www. fool. com/ investing/ small-cap/ 2007/ 04/ 05/ the-ultimate-buy-signal. aspx
[4]http:/ / store. traders. com/ -v03-c04-ulti-pdf. htmlArticle Sources and Contributors 172
Article Sources and Contributors
Technical analysis  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=410820163  Contributors: -oo0(GoldTrader)0oo-, 21655, 2over0, A. B., Academic Challenger, AdjustShift, Akamad,
Alanwaltman, Alex.tan, All We Have To Fear Is Me, Allstarecho, Amatulic, Ampere, Andreas Toth, Anna Lincoln, Anul, Arjayay, Attics, Axlrosen, Bagatelle, Bbands, Beaumont,
BenFrantzDale, Benna, Bfigura, Bill.albing, Blair P. Houghton, Bodyofknowledge, Borgx, Brick Thrower, BrokenSegue, BrownHairedGirl, Buldri, Cashexpert, Chakreshsinghai, Charles
Matthews, Chartsonly, Chris Roy, Chrisahn, Chrumps, Cisum.ili.dilm, CliffC, Clovis Sangrail, Co94, Cool Hand Luke, Ctatlantic, Ctt3716, D.h, DJ Clayworth, DMCer, DabMachine, Dacamic,
Dangermouse72, Danski14, Darkmeerkat, Davewho2, Daytona2, DeeDeeKerby, Denoir, Destynova, Diabloblue, Diannaa, Diptanshu.D, Discospinster, DocendoDiscimus, Drewwiki,
EGMichaels, ENeville, Eck, Edward, Elapsed, Elroch, Everyking, Ezgoing85018, FL Geezer, Fastfission, Fatherdagon, Fillmnnight, Filmnight, Filur, Finell, Fxdealer, Gaius Cornelius,
Gandalf61, Georgewilliamherbert, Gijsdereeper, Globex78, Goudzovski, GraemeL, Greensburger, Gregorydavid, Gymsim, Hadal, Happytech, Hardeeps, Harrimanpr, Heron, Hindahinda, Hnjvr,
Hqb, Husond, IMSFX, IgorLaurelli, ImperfectlyInformed, InShaneee, Inves20, Ioeth, ItayGolan, ItosLemma, J.delanoy, JJLudemann, JLBernstein, JLW777, JVBraun, Jerryseinfeld,
JethroElfman, Jfeckstein, Jimstromberg, Jm546, Jmcgoo, John Quiggin, JonHarder, Jonel, Jonkozer, Jonwickmann, JulesH, Junkyardprince, Karol Langner, Kbrose, Keithbob, Keller1125,
KenFehling, Kevin Ryde, KevinWho, Kilva, Kku, Kricke, Kuru, Kwertii, Kwsn, Lamro, Lars Ingebrigtsen, Leibniz, Levineps, Lhclin, Liface, MRBigdeli, Madhero88, Marcika, Maria C Mosak,
Mark Renier, MarquezComelab, MartinDK, Masparasol, Mastertrader, Maurreen, Mbhiii, Mcduffodonnell, Mdd, Mfortier, Mgcalhoun, Michael Hardy, MichaelHiggins, Ministry of random
walks, Motorracer, MrArt, MrOllie, Mswake, Mydogategodshat, Nakon, Narnia205, Nealcardwell, Neilc, Nevron, Nirvana2013, Nsaa, Nurg, Oktogon12, OmriN, OwenX, PWdiamond, Page Up,
Panayiotis Markou, Paradoxsociety, Patsup, Pcb21, Peter681, Peterpudaite, Pgreenfinch, Pgrieg, Pleclech, Quaeler, Quarl, R'n'B, RANJINAP, RIPSAW1986, Rama's Arrow, RayBirks, Rdangi,
Rdls01, RedWordSmith, Redmercury82, Relata refero, Renaissance Man, RexNL, Rgfolsom, Rhobite, Rich Farmbrough, Rjwilmsi, Rob Hooft, Roberta F., Romaioi, RomanSpa, Rooster edits,
Safesanctuary, Samiharris, Seaphoto, Seglea, Sensatus, Sgcook, Shadowjams, Shaharyarrao, Shantris Te'Amdoraja, Shawnc, Shell Kinney, Shotwell, Silver hr, Silviamenini, Sir Vicious,
Smallbones, Snoopyjc, SorenLanng, Soultrader, Sposer, St3vo, Stephen B Streater, Stocksnet, Superbull, Susurrus, THF, TJ36, TastyPoutine, Tautkusm, Tedtick, Tempshill, The Anome,
Themfromspace, Time9, Tomjones999, Tony C, Toomanywordstoolittletime, Trade2tradewell, TradingBands, Tranbryant, Troed, Tututumuch, Typelighter, Ulric1313, Urbansuperstar, Valwen,
Vapour, Veesicle, Vgy7ujm, Vickypedia30, Victoria Madden, Vincentangeles, Vision3001, Vitaleyes, Wai Wai, Wapcaplet, Wdfarmer, WebScientist, Willsmith, Www.crossprofit.com, Xiner,
Yahya Abdal-Aziz, Yetzoz, Yworo, Zafaridi, Zeninubasho, Zoogod, 794 anonymous edits
Support and resistance  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=408664923  Contributors: -oo0(GoldTrader)0oo-, Aamarx, Amatulic, Anticipation of a New Lover's Arrival, The,
Arthur Rubin, Bklyntech, Chakreshsinghai, Charles Matthews, CliffC, DocendoDiscimus, Edward, Eric Shalov, Ezgoing85018, Gaius Cornelius, Hu12, JenyaTsoy, John Quiggin, Navin gupt,
OccamzRazor, Pgreenfinch, RJFJR, RamallahCC, Rhobite, Ronnotel, Sensatus, StockWrap, Stoph, Technicalanalyst1, Thingg, Ticmarc, Time9, Tony C, Wai Wai, Zentrader, 35 anonymous edits
Trend line (technical analysis)  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=387881374  Contributors: Arthurium, CliffC, Dkostiuk, Elroch, Goudzovski, Gowish, Madhero88, Mulad,
Pascal666, Sensatus, Stoph, Time9, Utcursch, 11 anonymous edits
Breakout (technical analysis)  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=386996805  Contributors: -oo0(GoldTrader)0oo-, Altafqadir, AndrewWatt, JohnCJWood, Karol Langner,
Kevin Ryde, Meco, OccamzRazor, Time9, 4 anonymous edits
Market trend  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=410424496  Contributors: -oo0(GoldTrader)0oo-, 1122334455, A. B., ALE!, Adavies42, Addshore, Al Pereira, Alan Liefting,
Americanjoe1776, Amindsaleh, Amitm.iimi, Andycjp, Angie Y., AnnalisaShanghai, Antandrus, Anthm76, Arielco, At close range, Attys, Avraham, Bachrach44, Barrylb, Beetstra, Ben Ward,
Bender235, Bifflum, Bjdehut, Blathnaid, Bluemoose, Bluerasberry, Bnagra, Bogey97, Bonadea, BoomerAB, Brianamaronjitwill, Brick Thrower, Bull Market, Caesura, Cagarland, Calm,
Chakreshsinghai, Chatfecter, Chillum, Choster, Ckatz, Clay Solomon, CliffC, Clinevol98, Coolhandscot, Curious Violet, DabMachine, Danausi, Dancurranjr, DanielCD, Darth Panda,
DavePeters44, Dbfirs, Ddxc, DeadEyeArrow, Death2, Diptanshu.D, Downtown dan seattle, Dsarokin, Ehrenkater, Ejs96, EncMstr, Epbr123, Erudecorp, Eubulides, EvaK, Everyking,
Exaltedangel09, Examtester, Excirial, Exert, FayssalF, Fieldday-sunday, Fleela, Foobaz, Fredbauder, Furrykef, Gaius Cornelius, Gilliam, Gjd001, Gosteve, Gurch, Hairy Dude, Hairy poker
monster, Happybp, Hede2000, HeteroZellous, Husond, HybridBoy, Immunize, Investor Boot Camp, ItayGolan, JLBernstein, Jasperdoomen, Jayaramkasi, Jesse Viviano, JimWae, Jmnbatista,
John K, John Quiggin, Jorfer, Joseph Solis in Australia, Karol Langner, Kbrose, Keithbob, King brosby, KirkL, Knucmo2, Kuru, LeaveSleaves, Leibniz, Levineps, LilHelpa, Lockesdonkey,
Lodha.ankur, Logical2u, MECU, MER-C, Ma'ame Michu, Marchartnett, Masken, Materialscientist, Mauls, Mbc362, Mdweisbeck, Mdz, Mic, Michael Hardy, Mitchbing, Mmortal03, Mr.
Delayer, MrArt, MrOllie, Mshanleysr, Mwanner, NFLDolphinsGuy, Netsumdisc, Newly h, Nikai, Nirvana2013, Normxxx, Notinasnaid, Nsaa, Nurg, Oceanhahn, Olikea, Oliver.hessling, One,
Opticburst, Page Up, Pakaran, Patricius Augustus, Pcb21, Peterbubik, Pfainuk, Pfalstad, Pgan002, Pgreenfinch, PhilKnight, Philip Trueman, Photoframesplus, Polluks, Popageorgio, Poppabear1,
Porsche997SBS, Portraitsketch, Pthag, Quaeler, Quarl, Rabmemari, Reach Out to the Truth, Renaissance Man, ResidentAnthropologist, Rgfolsom, Rhobite, Robert K S, Romaioi, Ronz, Samsara,
Scxnwa, Shakespeare2, Smallbones, Smallman12q, StaticGull, Stephenb, Steverexman, Stroppolo, Student7, Tabletop, Taemyr, Tanaats, TastyPoutine, Taxman, Tcw8048, Tedder, Teeninvestor,
Teryx, Tglacour, TheDJ, Thegreedytrader, Tiddly Tom, Tiger888, Time9, Timprophet, Tiramisuloverr, Tmangray, Trade2tradewell, Trappem, Twistinaround, Umofomia, Utcursch, Versageek,
Versus22, Vividesigns, Wavelength, Weisbeck, Westcoastbiker, Wikipeder, Wikixoox, WynnQuon, Yaoleilei, Yone Fernandes, Zoolook, 482 anonymous edits
Dead cat bounce  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=406048893  Contributors: -oo0(GoldTrader)0oo-, ALargeElk, Adamgpope, Afterwriting, Avocado, Bigdaddy1981,
BoomerAB, CliffC, Desmay, Eastlaw, Furrykef, Grenavitar, Heroeswithmetaphors, History2007, Hotcrocodile, HsiehLi, Ilmari Karonen, Ingolfson, John Quiggin, Joseph Solis in Australia, Kask,
Keithbob, Magioladitis, Mapoftasmania, Merovingian, MisfitToys, Nirvana2013, Noelvginnity, OldakQuill, Pcb21, Perfect Proposal, Phoenixrod, Piano non troppo, Qwerty Binary, Rjwilmsi,
Robofish, Rror, SB Willie, Sentriclecub, SharkD, Sidasta, SupermanML, Time9, Tpb, Traderookie, UtherSRG, Vidkun, 60 anonymous edits
Elliott wave principle  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=409621203  Contributors: A man in space, AMH-DS, Aforallie, Ahoerstemeier, Alerante, Alextangent,
AllGloryToTheHypnotoad, Amakuha, Anotherwebeditor, ArmadilloFromHell, Azazyel, Bejnar, Bender235, Brighterorange, Brusegadi, Chaiim, Cje, Crasshopper, Cww, D.h, DavidWBrooks,
Diptanshu.D, DocendoDiscimus, Drewwiki, Ebrenner8, Edward, Ekwos, Exeunt, Finconsult, GKantaris, GaryLKaplan, Giftlite, Green Cardamom, Greensburger, Gudea, ICouldBeWrong,
Iridescent, ItosLemma, JForget, Jamesclunie, Jasonsullivan, Jburt1, Jeliasen, Jerryseinfeld, John Quiggin, JulesH, Karol Langner, Kbrose, KelleyCook, Kevin Ryde, Ksyrie, Lambiam,
Loganberry, Marcika, Medlongj, Michael Hardy, Ministry of random walks, Monkeyman, MrStalker, Mydogategodshat, Nematalla, Nirvana2013, Nurg, OccamzRazor, Oleg Alexandrov,
OnlyTron, Orangemike, OwenX, PVTPoint, Pauljlamont, Pgreenfinch, Philip ea, Pleclech, Psinu, Punanimal, Redninjatwo, Rgfolsom, Robertknyc, Robofish, RookZERO, Rusnak1961, S3000,
SDC, Sakuragi indofx, Sancarr, Semperf, Smallbones, Spirit Of Truth, Sposer, Suryadas, THF, TapeReader, Tbjablin, The Anome, Ticklemygrits, Time9, Timotheus Canens, Tjmayerinsf,
Trade2tradewell, Tradermatt, Vasildakov, Wassermann, Yworo, Z10x, 140 anonymous edits
Fibonacci retracement  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=400097216  Contributors: Bxj, CBM, Destynova, Forextc, Linkinmonkey, Melcombe, Mhdeaton, Michael Hardy,
Nirgle, Ohnoitsjamie, Safesanctuary, Sparatokos, TJRC, Time9, 4 anonymous edits
Pivot point  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=410559398  Contributors: Amatulic, Anon lynx, Canopus1, Diptanshu.D, Ezgoing85018, Hersko915, Kbrose, OccamzRazor,
Ohnoitsjamie, Sposer, Time9, Vegaswikian, Zenntrader, 4 anonymous edits
Dow Theory  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=404011741  Contributors: AdamAtlas, Alphachimp, Arthena, DMG413, Dcljr, DerHexer, Dgphilli, Dpbsmith, Drewwiki,
Eloquence, ImperfectlyInformed, Isnow, Jastaruk, Karris76, Kdau, Kevin Ryde, Kggucwa, King brosby, Kwertii, Leuko, Markhu, Michael Hardy, Mtcedar, Mweymar, OS2Warp, OccamzRazor,
Officiallyover, Ohnoitsjamie, Petit Djul, Richard Arthur Norton (1958- ), Sam Hocevar, SimonP, Smallbones, SomeNumpty, Splash, ThinkBlue, Time9, Versageek, Washburnmav,
WikipedianYknOK, Ylem, 121 anonymous edits
Candlestick chart  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=410670556  Contributors: A. B., AdjustShift, Aesopos, Antonrojo, Armcharles, Arthena, Attys, Avenue, BenFrantzDale,
Bigmantonyd, BlackswanFX, Booyabazooka, Brian Pearson, CKlunck, Camiflower, Ceoil, Charles Matthews, CliffC, ColdPopTart, Commontrader, Craigy144, Cyde, DMCer, Daytraders,
Deipnosophista, Den fjättrade ankan, Diannaa, Dreish, Eve Teschlemacher, Ezgoing85018, Felixpeters, Fillmnnight, Filmnight, Flowanda, Fred Bradstadt, Gary King, Gene s, GraemeL,
Hersko915, Hu12, JacobRoberts2, Jeshii, Jjputz, Jmlk17, Johan214, Johndburger, Karol Langner, Kevin Ryde, Ksyrie, Kuru, Lamro, Leon7, LeonWhite, MER-C, Mastertrader, Mdd, Melcombe,
Mfortier, Mhdeaton, Misza13, Motorracer, Mydogategodshat, Mynameiscurtis, Nasubi, Nevron, OccamzRazor, Ohnoitsjamie, Old Guard, Othaln, OwenX, Persianlor, Pleclech, RealisticInvestor,
Retired username, Rgfolsom, Rhobite, Rob200, Robofish, SDC, Sbwoodside, Shakura, Slawojarek, Strategiesformarket, Tbower, Tekmatic38, ThomasMark, Time9, Timothylord, Ucanreply,
Underpants, VadZ, Vivaldi, Yanik Crépeau, Zaxios, 115 anonymous edits
Open-high-low-close chart  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=391205478  Contributors: Avenue, D6, GoingBatty, MER-C, OccamzRazor, Time9, 1 anonymous edits
Line chart  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=394258778  Contributors: Ageekgal, Appraiser, Ashawley, Beland, Fred Bradstadt, GraemeL, Henrikb4, J04n, LightYear, Lova
Falk, Mdd, Nbarth, Nevron, Silver Edge, Svick, The wub, Time9, WikHead, 25 anonymous edits
Point and figure chart  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=410062227  Contributors: -oo0(GoldTrader)0oo-, Architeuthis, Avitya, Bender235, Benna, Billw2, Bluemoose,
Bodyofknowledge, Chris the speller, Closedmouth, Conscious, Curps, ESkog, Fawad313, Fplay, Gaius Cornelius, Gene Nygaard, Helenabella, Ilovetotrade, JodyB, Kevin Ryde, Kraftlos,
Melcombe, Mnruxter, OccamzRazor, Papercutbiology, Puma12a, Quentar, RayBirks, Rdrozd, Rhobite, Rjm at sleepers, Skapur, Smallbones, Sposer, Tbonetime, Thepatriots, Time9, Vugluskr,
Wai Wai, Znmeb, 96 anonymous editsArticle Sources and Contributors 173
Kagi chart  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=406762936  Contributors: Amatulic, AnyFile, Billw2, Chuunen Baka, Destynova, Hersko915, Jdclevenger, Lamro, LightYear,
Maestlin, Mdd, Melcombe, Recognizance, Rich257, That Guy, From That Show!, Time9, 20 anonymous edits
Chart pattern  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=396878235  Contributors: -Ril-, Altafqadir, Amatulic, Arthurium, CliffC, Commontrader, Davidraajan, Fatherdagon, Gaius
Cornelius, Greensburger, Hu12, John Quiggin, Kappa, Karol Langner, KharBevNor, Klip game, MER-C, Majon10, Marishik88, MartinDK, Mild Bill Hiccup, Mlowrey5, Natebailey,
Nirvana2013, Othaln, RJFJR, Sam Hocevar, Saurabh.nova, Shadowjams, Ticmarc, Time9, Twigletmac, Wackymacs, Yawalkar, 17 anonymous edits
Head and shoulders (chart pattern)  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=408665318  Contributors: A. B., Amatulic, Arthur Rubin, Arthurium, Bigbluefish, Camiflower,
Chakreshsinghai, CliffC, Commontrader, Davost, Excirial, Frontiercowboy, Geoffrey.landis, John Quiggin, Kidmercury, OccamzRazor, Rich Farmbrough, Saurabh.nova, StocksDoc, Tim Parenti,
Time9, 完全処方マニュアル, 松岡明芳, 8 anonymous edits
Cup and handle  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=408665340  Contributors: Alan Liefting, Arthur Rubin, Calliopejen1, Frontiercowboy, Gonzonoir, Jimmy Pitt, John
Quiggin, MatthewVanitas, Miyomiyo1050, Mlowrey5, Stephen B Streater, Time9, Yahya Abdal-Aziz, 1 anonymous edits
Double top and double bottom  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=408665287  Contributors: Alexius08, Altafqadir, John Quiggin, Kbrose, Lamro, MER-C, Majon10, Mild Bill
Hiccup, Nirvana2013, Time9, Tivedshambo, Triwbe, Woohookitty, 1 anonymous edits
Triple top and triple bottom  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=411495705  Contributors: Altafqadir, Arthur Rubin, John Quiggin, Lamro, Nirvana2013, OccamzRazor, Time9,
4 anonymous edits
Broadening top  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=408665210  Contributors: Altafqadir, Arthur Rubin, John Quiggin, OccamzRazor, Radiojon, Time9, Wm henderson
Price channels  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=408665191  Contributors: Arthur Rubin, Greensburger, John Quiggin, OccamzRazor, Time9, 1 anonymous edits
Wedge pattern  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=408665150  Contributors: Altafqadir, Arthur Rubin, Bender235, Commontrader, Frontiercowboy, John Quiggin, NetJohn,
OccamzRazor, Prestonmag, Radiojon, Time9, Woohookitty, YUL89YYZ, 8 anonymous edits
Triangle (chart pattern)  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=408665096  Contributors: Arthur Rubin, Commontrader, Fabrictramp, Jimmy Pitt, John Quiggin, Majon10,
OccamzRazor, Time9
Flag and pennant patterns  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=408665059  Contributors: Arthur Rubin, Commontrader, Frontiercowboy, John Quiggin, Majon10, Mild Bill
Hiccup, OccamzRazor, Sposer, Time9
The Island Reversal  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=408666078  Contributors: Altafqadir, Arthur Rubin, John Quiggin, Time9, Xezbeth, 1 anonymous edits
Gap (chart pattern)  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=410564010  Contributors: Akerans, Altafqadir, AndrewWTaylor, Arthur Rubin, Bwilkins, Diptanshu.D, Everington f,
John Quiggin, OccamzRazor, Radiojon, Tabletop, Time9, 6 anonymous edits
Candlestick pattern  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=409100303  Contributors: Altafqadir, Time9, 7 anonymous edits
Doji  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=387957372  Contributors: Candlestick.es, Commontrader, Lamro, MER-C, OccamzRazor, Time9, 2 anonymous edits
Hammer (candlestick pattern)  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=396507567  Contributors: Commoner1, Commontrader, Fabrictramp, MER-C, OccamzRazor, Time9, 2
anonymous edits
Hanging man (candlestick pattern)  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=396507624  Contributors: Time9
Inverted hammer  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=396507681  Contributors: Commoner1, Giraffedata, LouriePieterse, OccamzRazor, RadioFan, Time9, 1 anonymous edits
Shooting star (candlestick pattern)  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=396507732  Contributors: Commoner1, GregorB, OccamzRazor, Time9, Uncle Dick, 3 anonymous edits
Marubozu  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=387899997  Contributors: ColdPopTart, Doc Quintana, Falcon8765, Lamro, Melcombe, OccamzRazor, Time9, Waacstats, 1
anonymous edits
Spinning top (candlestick pattern)  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=387899968  Contributors: Commontrader, GainLine, Lamro, MER-C, OccamzRazor, Time9, 3
anonymous edits
Three white soldiers  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=407504522  Contributors: Candlestick.es, Ceoil, Fences and windows, JA(000)Davidson, Lamro, OccamzRazor,
Rgfolsom, Time9, Xtzou, 2 anonymous edits
Three Black Crows  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=407184330  Contributors: Candlestick.es, Hraefen, Lamro, Raymondwinn, Rgfolsom, Time9, 2 anonymous edits
Morning star (candlestick pattern)  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=409862172  Contributors: 1ForTheMoney, Commontrader, Diannaa, Ergateesuk, OccamzRazor,
OlEnglish, Phuzion, Time9, Wuhwuzdat
Hikkake Pattern  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=394416853  Contributors: Candlestick.es, Cmdrjameson, DocendoDiscimus, Giraffedata, JulesH, Lamro, MER-C, PM
Poon, RHaworth, Rosiestep, Time9, Wai Wai, Zoogod, 39 anonymous edits
Average Directional Index  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=402604297  Contributors: Amatulic, Commontrader, Kirill Borisenko, Lucamasio, Majon10, Mild Bill Hiccup,
Saurabh.nova, Time9, 13 anonymous edits
Ichimoku Kinkō Hyō  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=409704403  Contributors: CaroloU, Discospinster, Gkdoda, Maciboci, Motorracer, Seibun, Smuljonosmuljono, Time9,
Tokorokoko, 10 anonymous edits
MACD  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=409518533  Contributors: -oo0(GoldTrader)0oo-, A. B., Airsplit, Amatulic, ArglebargleIV, Atlant, Barkeep, Brick Thrower,
Brusegadi, Calculus1985, Chepurko, Chewheng, Chikichiki, Collinseow, Cremepuff222, Crowne, D Auletta, Daytona2, Dickreuter, Diptanshu.D, DocendoDiscimus, Dpwkbw, Enerelt,
Esanchez7587, Foobarhoge, GraemeL, Grafen, Greensburger, Gunark, Hdante, Hech, Helvcn, Hu12, Inodotcom, JLaTondre, Jackieannpatterson, JenyaTsoy, JoelDick, Karol Langner, Kelson,
Kevin Ryde, Khai42, Kidmercury, Lamro, Lgauthie, Lukasz rostek, MER-C, Majon10, Merosonox, Nlu, Noloop, Ocaasi, Philip Trueman, Pinkadelica, Pleclech, RamallahCC, Rhobite,
Robinsenior, Saurabh.nova, Ssnseawolf, Stainedglasscurtain, Sukisuki, TechAnalyster, TheSpook, Time9, Trade2tradewell, Tradermatt, UweD, Vvarkey, Wikinotforcommercialuse, Wmahan,
157 anonymous edits
Mass index  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=387700074  Contributors: Basilicofresco, Beetstra, Brusegadi, Jimmy Pitt, Karol Langner, Kevin Ryde, Lgauthie, Severo,
TechAnalyster, Time9, Wmahan, Xomyork, 3 anonymous edits
Moving average  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=407515835  Contributors: A bit iffy, Adouglass, Amatulic, Amitchaudhary, Beetstra, Berland, Bil1, Btm, Btyner, Carmitsp,
Chikichiki, Chipmunck, Ckatz, CliffC, DARTH SIDIOUS 2, Daniel Quinlan, Dark Mage, DeluxNate, DerBorg, Dickreuter, DragonHawk, Econotechie, Ekotkie, Epbr123, Esanchez7587, Euku,
Falk Lieder, Feco, Fenice, Foobarhoge, Gakmo, Gandalf61, Giftlite, Gleb, Glennimoss, GraemeL, Grin, Hdante, HenningThielemann, Hu12, JLaTondre, Jamelan, JenyaTsoy, Jianingy, Karol
Langner, Kazov, Kevin Ryde, Kwertii, Lambiam, Lamro, Landroni, Lenrius, Makeemlighter, Manicstreetpreacher, Martinkv, Materialscientist, Mathaddins, Maxlittle2007, Mazin07, Melcombe,
Merosonox, Michael Hardy, MilfordMark, Mir76, Mkacholia, Mwtoews, Naught101, Naveensakhamuri, Netkinetic, Nikai, Ninly, Paradoctor, PhilKnight, Pim2009, Pisquared8, Pleclech, Qwfp,
R. S. Shaw, Rabarberski, Rainypearl, Ramorum, Rentier, Requestion, Richard n, Robomojo, Ron shelf, SLi, Satori Son, Sid1138, Siebrand, Soluch, Stocksnet, TechAnalyster, Teorth, Thelb4,
Time9, TomyDuby, Tonyho, Towel401, Tradermatt, Tristanreid, USTUNINSEL, Utcursch, VladimirKorablin, Wai Wai, Wavelength, Wayne Slam, WikHead, Wikinotforcommercialuse,
Wikiolap, William Avery, Yahya Abdal-Aziz,  ,יבצ לאינד175 anonymous edits
Parabolic SAR  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=408516497  Contributors: -oo0(GoldTrader)0oo-, AstonG, Beetstra, Brick Thrower, Chikinsawsage, CliffC, Commontrader,
DocendoDiscimus, Fredrik, GraemeL, Karol Langner, Lgauthie, Sentinel.ru, Studerby, TechAnalyster, Tedder, Time9, VKokielov, Wiki-winky, Wmahan, 17 anonymous editsArticle Sources and Contributors 174
Trix (technical analysis)  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=391122066  Contributors: Bender235, Brusegadi, Crystallina, Fuhghettaboutit, Fxwriter, Grammarmonger, Kevin
Ryde, Lenrius, Texture, That Guy, From That Show!, Time9, Wai Wai, Wikinotforcommercialuse, 3 anonymous edits
Vortex Indicator  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=396157624  Contributors: Lamro, Rich Farmbrough, Teapotgeorge, Time9, Vickypedia30, 4 anonymous edits
Know Sure Thing (KST) Oscillator  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=396107132  Contributors: Diptanshu.D, Time9
Momentum (finance)  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=408983848  Contributors: Amatulic, JASpencer, Lamro, Longhair, Pascal666, PigFlu Oink, ShelfSkewed, Sslevine,
Time9, Veggito, 7 anonymous edits
Relative Strength Index  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=406110214  Contributors: -oo0(GoldTrader)0oo-, A. B., Amatulic, Brusegadi, CDN99, Calculus1985, CaptivaKid,
Chepurko, Chewheng, Chikichiki, Darktemplar, Dickreuter, Divergence Report, Enivid, Esanchez7587, Fxwriter, GraemeL, Greensburger, Hardeeps, Hersko915, Hu12, IvanLanin, JLaTondre,
Jisok, Jvs.cz, Kbrose, Kevin Ryde, Klimov, Klip game, Lamro, Lgauthie, Lommer, Martian.knight, Meini, Michael Hardy, Ocaasi, Peterl, Piezoe, Pim2009, Pisquared8, Qwfp, RamallahCC,
Rhobite, Rjwilmsi, Salon Essahj, Satori Son, Saurabh.nova, Stepa, Tebitby, TechAnalyster, TechPurism, Time9, Tony C, Tradermatt, Vynbos, Wmahan, 77 anonymous edits
Stochastic oscillator  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=406111209  Contributors: -oo0(GoldTrader)0oo-, 4wajzkd02, Alfonse3839, Amatulic, Bodhi.root, Brusegadi,
Calculus1985, Commontrader, Diptanshu.D, Dpwkbw, Drbreznjev, Equitymanager, Ettrig, Finell, Foobarhoge, Giftlite, Grafen, Harksaw, Hu12, Karol Langner, Lamro, McGeddon, Mrdthree,
Pleclech, R'n'B, Rjwilmsi, The Last Heretic, TimPendragon, Time9, Tmonzenet, Trade2tradewell, TraderTalk, Tradermatt, WikHead, Yannick56, 36 anonymous edits
Williams %R  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=387701605  Contributors: Aboutblank, Beetstra, Brusegadi, Casual.formality, Cmdrjameson, Hu12, Karol Langner, Kevin
Ryde, Relativestrength, Rentier, S M Lee, TechAnalyster, Time9, Wordsmith, 11 anonymous edits
Volume (finance)  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=385397904  Contributors: Gert7, Lamro, Mendelay, Time9, Vugluskr
Accumulation/distribution index  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=394939687  Contributors: Beetstra, Brusegadi, Cyclopediafixer, Gkofman, Karol Langner, Kevin Ryde,
Lamro, Malcolmxl5, Pessimist2006, Rentier, StockWrap, TechAnalyster, Time9, Vugluskr, 3 anonymous edits
Money Flow Index  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=400583760  Contributors: Beetstra, Karol Langner, Kashtrader, Kevin Ryde, Kgeis, Kjkolb, Landroni, Lgauthie, Lihaas,
Macroeng, OccamzRazor, StockWrap, TechAnalyster, Theodolite, Time9, Vugluskr, 7 anonymous edits
On-balance volume  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=387700708  Contributors: 0goodiegoodie0, Beetstra, GraemeL, Graham Hurley, Have Gun, Will Travel, Hu12, Karol
Langner, Kevin Ryde, Lamro, Lgauthie, Sebesta, TechAnalyster, Time9, Tradermatt, Vugluskr, Wmahan, 6 anonymous edits
Volume Price Trend  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=391603326  Contributors: Beetstra, Brusegadi, DaveJacks, Kevin Ryde, Kgeis, Lamro, Lgauthie, OccamzRazor,
TechAnalyster, Time9, Vugluskr, Wmahan, 9 anonymous edits
Force Index  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=394242611  Contributors: Akhristov, Avraham, Beetstra, Canis Lupus, Dougweller, EGGS, Jfingers88, Jimmy Pitt, Karol
Langner, TechAnalyster, Time9, 2 anonymous edits
Negative volume index  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=399048758  Contributors: Huachuca, Jimmy Pitt, Karol Langner, M3tsrule, Time9, Woz2
Ease of movement  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=387699744  Contributors: Anameofmyveryown, Brad22dir, Brusegadi, EGGS, Jimmy Pitt, Karol Langner, Kgeis,
Monkeyflower, Rich Farmbrough, Severo, Tabletop, Time9, 1 anonymous edits
Volatility (finance)  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=408037982  Contributors: A quant, Andrewpmack, Arthena, Baeksu, Biem, BrokenSegue, Brw12, Btyner, Calair,
Canadaduane, Catofgrey, Charles Matthews, Christofurio, Cleared as filed, Complexfinance, D15724C710N, DocendoDiscimus, DominicConnor, Eeekster, Ehdr, Emperorbma, Enchanter, Eric
Kvaalen, Favonian, Finnancier, Fredbauder, Fvasconcellos, GraemeL, Helon, Hobsonlane, Honza Záruba, Hu12, Infinity0, Innohead, Jerryseinfeld, Jewzip, Jimmy Pitt, John Fader, Jphillips,
KKramer, Karol Langner, Kingpin13, KnightRider, Kyng, LARS, Lamro, Marishik88, Martinp, Mayerwin, Merube 89, Michael Hardy, Nburden, Orzetto, Pcb21, PeterM, Pgreenfinch, Phil
Boswell, Pt johnston, Quaeler, Ronnotel, Ryguasu, S.Örvarr.S, SKL, ShaunMacPherson, Swerfvalk, Taral, Tarc87, Tassedethe, Tedder, That Guy, From That Show!, Time9, UnitedStatesian,
UweD, Volatility Professor, Walkerma, Wongm, Wushi-En, Yurik, Zhenqinli, 170 anonymous edits
Average True Range  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=391863070  Contributors: Brusegadi, Camiflower, Karol Langner, Kauczuk, Kevin Ryde, Kilva, Lgauthie,
TechAnalyster, Time9, Tomeasy, Trade2tradewell, Wikinotforcommercialuse, Wmahan, 10 anonymous edits
Bollinger Bands  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=408804452  Contributors: Allens, Amatulic, ArglebargleIV, AxelBoldt, Bbands, Beetstra, Bombastus, Brusegadi, Cherkash,
CliffC, Colinc719, David.Monniaux, DeeDeeKerby, DoritKehr, Dpwkbw, Femto, Greensburger, GregorB, Grutness, Heryu, Hu12, Hurricaneserver, Jimmy Pitt, Jpeeling, Karol Langner, Kevin
Ryde, Lamro, Lgauthie, Lhclin, Love Krittaya, Mailer diablo, MarketTechnician, Mhdeaton, Michael Hardy, MikeJ9919, Mrtenev, Mysmp, NortyNort, Peter Harriman, Piezoe, Pleclech,
Relativestrength, RogerBabson, Subsolar, TechAnalyster, Tedder, Time9, Tirins.play, Toddst1, Tradermatt, TradingBands, Wiki-winky, Wmahan, Woohookitty, Wordsmith, Yahya Abdal-Aziz,
Yworo, Zander, 194 anonymous edits
Donchian channel  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=387699644  Contributors: Antimatt, Inquisitus, Jimmy Pitt, Kevin Ryde, Lochness Monstah, Piotrus, Redfarmer, Reiser,
Time9, 10 anonymous edits
Standard deviation  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=411509998  Contributors: 1exec1, AJR, Aberglaube, Abscissa, AbsolutDan, Abtin, Adamjslund, Addshore, Adi4094,
Admissions, Aeriform, Afa86, Alansohn, Ale jrb, Alex.g, Alexandrov, Allessia67, Alvinwc, Amead, Amitch, Amorim Parga, Anameofmyveryown, Andre Engels, Andres, AndrewWTaylor,
Andy Marchbanks, Andysor, Anonymous Dissident, Anonymous editor, Anwar saadat, Arbitrarily0, Aroundthewayboy, Artichoker, Artorius, Asaba, Ashawley, Ashiabor, AugPi, AxelBoldt,
Bart133, Bdesham, Beefyt, Beetstra, Behco, Beland, BenFrantzDale, BiT, Billgordon1099, Blehfu, Bo Jacoby, Bobo192, Bodnotbod, Brianga, Brutha, BryanG, Bsodmike, Btyner,
Buchanan-Hermit, Bulgaroctonus, Butcheries, CJLL Wright, CRGreathouse, CSWarren, CWii, CYD, Calculator1000, CambridgeBayWeather, Captain-n00dle, Carmichael95, Cathardic,
Ceyockey, Charles Matthews, Chatfecter, Chillwithabong, Chris the speller, ChrisFontenot13, Chrism, Christopher Parham, Chrysrobyn, Ck lostsword, Clemwang, Cmichael, Coffee2theorems,
Conversion script, Coppertwig, Corrigann, Crazy Boris with a red beard, Crisófilax, Cutler, DARTH SIDIOUS 2, DRHagen, DRTllbrg, DVD R W, DVdm, Daev, DanielCD, Danielb613,
Danski14, Dave6, DavidMcKenzie, Davidkazuhiro, Dcoetzee, Ddiazhn, Ddofborg, Ddr, Decayintodust, DeeDeeKerby, Dekuntz, Delldot, Den fjättrade ankan, DerHexer, Dhanya139, Dick
Beldin, DieterVanUytvanck, Diomidis Spinellis, Dirkbb, Discospinster, Doctorambient, DomCleal, Dominus, Drappel, Dycedarg, Dylan Lake, Earth, Eb Oesch, Economist 2007, Egriffin, Elanb,
Elaragirl, Elliskev, Emerah, Enigmaman, Epbr123, Eric Olson, Erutuon, Esrever, Eve Teschlemacher, Everyking, Falcon8765, Fatla00, Felixrising, Flamurai, Forlornturtle, Forty two, Frehley,
Frencheigh, Fsiler, Furrykef, Fæ, G.engelstein, G716, Gabbe, Gail, Gary King, Gatoclass, Gauge, Gauravm1312, Geneffects, George Drummond, Gerriet42, Giftlite, Gilliam, Gingemonkey,
Giraffedata, Gjshisha, GlassCobra, Glen, Gogowitsch, Gouveia2, Graham87, Greentryst, Greg L, Gurch, Gvanrossum, Gyro Copter, Gzkn, Gökhan, H3llkn0wz, HaakonHjortland,
Hadleywickham, Haham hanuka, Haizum, HalfShadow, Harmil, HatlessAtlas, Hawaiian717, Hede2000, Heezy, Helix84, Henrygb, Hgberman, Hgrenbor, Hu12, Hut 8.5, Iccaldwell, Imagine
Reason, Inomyabcs, Intangir, Iridescent, Isaac Dupree, Isis, Isomorphic, IustinPop, JForget, JNW, JRBrown, Jacob grace, JadeInOz, Jake04961, Jamamala, Jamned, Janderk, Jcw69, Jean15paul,
Jeremy68, Jeremykemp, Jfitzg, Jim.belk, Jmoorhouse, Jni, Joerite, John Newbury, John11235813, JohnCD, Jratt, Jrennie, Jts10101, Justanyone, Justinep, KJS77, Kainaw, Kbolino, Kelvie,
Khunglongcon, Kingpin13, Kingturtle, Kiril Simeonovski, Kjtobo, Knkw, Knutux, Krinkle, Kungfuadam, Kuratowski's Ghost, Kuru, Kvng, Kyle824, LGW3, LWG, Lambiam, Larry_Sanger,
Ldm, Learning4ever, LeaveSleaves, Legare, Lethe, Lgauthie, Lilac Soul, LizardJr8, Loodog, Lucasgw8, Luna Santin, LysolPionex, M2Ys4U, M360 Real, MBisanz, MCepek, MER-C, MONGO,
Madir, Madoka, MagneticFlux, Magnus Bakken, Malo, Mapley, Marcos, Marek69, MarkSweep, Markhebner, Markkawika, Markpravda, Marokwitz, Matthew Yeager, Mavenp, Mbloore,
Mbweissman, McKay, Mcorson, Melchoir, Melcombe, Mercuryeagle, Methecooldude, Mets501, Mhinckley, Miaow Miaow, Michael Hardy, Miguel.mateo, Mike Rosoft, Milliemchi,
Mimithebrain, MisterSheik, Mjg3456789, Mjrice, Mjroyster, Moeron, Mollerup, Mooli, MrOllie, Ms2ger, Msm, Mud4t, Munckin, Murb:, Mwtoews, NHRHS2010, Nakon, Nathandean,
NawlinWiki, Nbarth, Nectarflowed, NeilRickards, Neudachnik, Neutrality, Ngoddard, Niallharkin, Nigholith, Noe, Nonagonal Spider, Normy rox, NorwegianBlue, NotAnonymous0, Novalis,
O18, Octahedron80, Ocvailes, Oleg Alexandrov, Oliphaunt, Omegatron, Omicronpersei8, Oxymoron83, P toolan, P.Silveira, PMHauge, Pak21, Pakaran, Paul August, Peter ryan 1976, Pharaoh of
the Wizards, PhilKnight, Philip Trueman, Pickledweller, Pinethicket, Piotrus, Poochy, Ppardal, Psb777, Pstanton, Psychlohexane, Publius3, Qwfp, RDBury, RJaguar3, RadioKirk, Ranjithsutari,
RayAYang, Razorflame, Rednblu, Reedy, Rememberway, Rettetast, Revipm, Rich Farmbrough, Richard001, Rickyfrizzlebum, Rompe, Ronz, Rose Garden, Rseay267, Ryk, Salix alba, Sam
Korn, Sameer r, SamuelTheGhost, Sander123, Savidan, Savie Kumara, Seaphoto, SebastianHelm, Seresin, Shanes, Shaun ward, Sietse Snel, SimonEast, Skbkekas, SkerHawx, Skittle, Slakr,
Slick0805, Slon02, Slowking Man, Some jerk on the Internet, Someguy1221, Sonicblade128, Spacepotato, SpeedyGonsales, Speedyboy, Spinality, Spliffy, Sstoneb, Stemonitis, Stepheng3,
Stevvers, StewartMH, Storkk, Stpasha, Suffusion of Yellow, Surachit, Susurrus, Swcurran, THEN WHO WAS PHONE?, Takanoha, Taxman, Tayste, TedE, Tempodivalse, Thadius856, The
Thing That Should Not Be, The sock that should not be, Thingg, ThomasNichols, ThomasStrohmann, Thr4wn, Tide rolls, Time9, Titoxd, Tlroche, Tom harrison, Tomi, Tompa, Tosayit,
Tpbradbury, TradingBands, Triwbe, Urdutext, Useight, Ute in DC, Vaughan Pratt, Verbum Veritas, Versus22, Vice regent, VictorAnyakin, VladimirReshetnikov, Voyagerfan5761, Waggers,
Warniats, Wavelength, Wayne Slam, Wikipe-tan, Wikipelli, Wildingd, William Avery, Winchelsea, Wmahan, Wolfkeeper, Wonglkd, Woood, Wykypydya, X-Fi6, Yachtsman1, Yamaguchi先生,
Yochai Twitto, Zafiroblue05, Zenkat, Zhieaanm, Zigger, Zvika, کشرز ,1427 anonymous editsArticle Sources and Contributors 175
Advance decline line  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=404004263  Contributors: AbsolutDan, Diptanshu.D, Igodard, JJLudemann, Jianwei81, Kfsung, Panchitaville, Paxse,
Time9, ViperSnake151
Commodity Channel Index  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=389303251  Contributors: -oo0(GoldTrader)0oo-, B, Beetstra, Beetstra public, Bobknowitall, Diptanshu.D,
Flyingtoaster1337, Hu12, Interactii, JenyaTsoy, Jozue, Karol Langner, Kevin Ryde, Lgauthie, Majon10, Mild Bill Hiccup, NicM, Phill.f, Ronnotel, Satori Son, Skysmith, TechAnalyster, Time9,
Trade2tradewell, Tradermatt, Trading watchdog, VilleAine, Welsh, Wikinotforcommercialuse, Wmahan, 46 anonymous edits
Coppock curve  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=408006542  Contributors: BuffaloBob, Carlossuarez46, Eleybod, Enivid, John of Reading, Karol Langner, Kevin Ryde,
Merosonox, Skittleys, Time9, 3 anonymous edits
Keltner channel  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=387712811  Contributors: Ephraim33, Greensburger, Hu12, Jgonion, Kevin Ryde, Klimov, Lgauthie, Relativestrength,
Time9, Wikinotforcommercialuse, Wmahan, 6 anonymous edits
McClellan Oscillator  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=391842582  Contributors: AllGloryToTheHypnotoad, Brad22dir, Christian424, Enerfax, Esmith512, Eyreland,
GreyWyvern, Time9, 3 anonymous edits
Ulcer Index  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=387701426  Contributors: GoingBatty, Jimmy Pitt, Kevin Ryde, Mandarax, TexasAndroid, Time9, WriterHound, 3 anonymous
edits
Ultimate Oscillator  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=407453811  Contributors: Beetstra, Brusegadi, Kevin Ryde, Lgauthie, SchuminWeb, TechAnalyster, Time9, Wmahan,
YoavD, 2 anonymous editsImage Sources, Licenses and Contributors 176
Image Sources, Licenses and Contributors
Image:Soporte-resistencia reverseroles.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Soporte-resistencia_reverseroles.jpg  License: Public Domain  Contributors: Leomty
Image:PaychexSupportResistanceChart.JPG  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:PaychexSupportResistanceChart.JPG  License: GNU Free Documentation License
 Contributors: BenFrantzDale, Sensatus
Image:MicrosoftSupportResistanceTradingChannelChart.JPG  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:MicrosoftSupportResistanceTradingChannelChart.JPG  License: GNU
Free Documentation License  Contributors: Sensatus
Image:BiometSupportLevelInvestmentTimingChart.JPG  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:BiometSupportLevelInvestmentTimingChart.JPG  License: GNU Free
Documentation License  Contributors: Sensatus
Image:OracleSupportResistanceTrendLineChart.JPG  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:OracleSupportResistanceTrendLineChart.JPG  License: GNU Free
Documentation License  Contributors: Sensatus
Image:sptrends19502008.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Sptrends19502008.jpg  License: Public Domain  Contributors: User:Everyman
File:Bulle und Bär Frankfurt.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Bulle_und_Bär_Frankfurt.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution-Sharealike 2.5  Contributors:
Eva K.
Image:Elliott wave.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Elliott_wave.svg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 2.5  Contributors: user:Masur
Image:GBP-JPY H4 Wave4.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:GBP-JPY_H4_Wave4.jpg  License: Public Domain  Contributors: sakuragi_indofx
File:fibretracement.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Fibretracement.png  License: unknown  Contributors: MetaQuotes Software Corp.
Image:Pivot point DJI2009 8M1d.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Pivot_point_DJI2009_8M1d.png  License: Creative Commons Attribution-Sharealike 3.0
 Contributors: User:Kbrose
Image:Pivot point GLD091020 5d15m.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Pivot_point_GLD091020_5d15m.png  License: Creative Commons Attribution-Sharealike
3.0  Contributors: User:Kbrose
Image:Candlestick-chart.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Candlestick-chart.png  License: Public Domain  Contributors: Gene s, Henrikb4, MithrandirMage, 2
anonymous edits
Image:Candle definition en.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Candle_definition_en.svg  License: Public Domain  Contributors: User:Rentier, User:Underpants
Image:Bollinger bands example, 2 stddevs.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Bollinger_bands_example,_2_stddevs.png  License: unknown  Contributors:
Joey-das-WBF, Kevin Ryde, 1 anonymous edits
File:Graph (PSF).png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Graph_(PSF).png  License: unknown  Contributors: Ma-Lik, Magnus Manske
Image:ScientificGraphSpeedVsTime.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:ScientificGraphSpeedVsTime.svg  License: Public Domain  Contributors: Urocyon
Image:Point&Figure.GIF  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Point&Figure.GIF  License: GNU Free Documentation License  Contributors: Original uploader was Victorv at
nl.wikipedia
Image:KagiSample2Chart echarts.gif  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:KagiSample2Chart_echarts.gif  License: GNU Free Documentation License  Contributors: Billw2,
Bryan Derksen
Image:H and s top new.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:H_and_s_top_new.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:H and s bottom new.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:H_and_s_bottom_new.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:Doubletop confirmed.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Doubletop_confirmed.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:Double bottom confirmation.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Double_bottom_confirmation.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors:
User:Altafqadir
Image:tripletop.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Tripletop.jpg  License: Public Domain  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:tripletop1.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Tripletop1.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:Triple bottom new.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Triple_bottom_new.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:broaden.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Broaden.jpg  License: Public Domain  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:Broadening new.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Broadening_new.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:Falling wedge.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Falling_wedge.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:Rising wedge.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Rising_wedge.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:triangle-ascending.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Triangle-ascending.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Commontrader
Image:triangle-descending.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Triangle-descending.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Commontrader
Image:triangle-symmetrical.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Triangle-symmetrical.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors:
User:Commontrader
Image:bull-flag.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Bull-flag.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Commontrader
Image:bear-pennant.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Bear-pennant.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Commontrader
Image:The island reversal new.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:The_island_reversal_new.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors:
User:Altafqadir
Image:Allgaps new.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Allgaps_new.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
File:measuringgap new.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Measuringgap_new.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
File:exhaustiongap new.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Exhaustiongap_new.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
File:commongap new.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Commongap_new.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
File:breakawaygap new.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Breakawaygap_new.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:Big_black_candle_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Big_black_candle_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:Big_white_candle_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Big_white_candle_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:Black_body_candle_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Black_body_candle_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors:
User:Altafqadir
Image:Doji_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Doji_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:Dragon_fly_doji_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Dragon_fly_doji_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:Gravestone_doji_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Gravestone_doji_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:Long_legged_doji_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Long_legged_doji_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:Hanging_man_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Hanging_man_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:hammer_pattern_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Hammer_pattern_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:Inverted_black_hammer_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Inverted_black_hammer_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors:
User:Altafqadir
Image:Inverted_hammer_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Inverted_hammer_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:Long_lower_shadow_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Long_lower_shadow_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors:
User:Altafqadir
Image:Long_upper_shadow_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Long_upper_shadow_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors:
User:AltafqadirImage Sources, Licenses and Contributors 177
Image:Marubozu_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Marubozu_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:Shooting_star_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Shooting_star_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:Spinning_top_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Spinning_top_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:white_body_candle_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:White_body_candle_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors:
User:Altafqadir
Image:Shaven_bottom_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Shaven_bottom_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:Shaven_head_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Shaven_head_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:Bearish_harami_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Bearish_harami_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:Bearish_harami_cross_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Bearish_harami_cross_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors:
User:Altafqadir
Image:Bearish_3_method_formation_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Bearish_3_method_formation_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0
 Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:Bullish_3_method_formation_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Bullish_3_method_formation_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0
 Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:Bullish_harami_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Bullish_harami_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:Bullish_harami_cross_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Bullish_harami_cross_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors:
User:Altafqadir
Image:Dark_cloud_cover_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Dark_cloud_cover_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:Engulfing_bearish_line_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Engulfing_bearish_line_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors:
User:Altafqadir
Image:Engulfing_bullish_line_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Engulfing_bullish_line_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors:
User:Altafqadir
Image:Evening_doji_star_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Evening_doji_star_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:Evening_star_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Evening_star_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:Falling_window1_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Falling_window1_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:Morning_doji_star_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Morning_doji_star_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:Morning_star_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Morning_star_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:On_neckline_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:On_neckline_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:Separating_lines_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Separating_lines_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:Three_black_crows_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Three_black_crows_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors:
User:Altafqadir
Image:Three_white_soldiers_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Three_white_soldiers_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors:
User:Altafqadir
Image:Tweezer_bottoms_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Tweezer_bottoms_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:Tweezer_tops_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Tweezer_tops_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:Doji_star_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Doji_star_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:Piercing_line_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Piercing_line_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:Rising_window_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Rising_window_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
File:Candle doji neutral.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Candle_doji_neutral.svg  License: Public Domain  Contributors: User:Rentier
File:Candle doji longlegged.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Candle_doji_longlegged.svg  License: Public Domain  Contributors: User:Rentier
File:Candle doji gravestone.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Candle_doji_gravestone.svg  License: Public Domain  Contributors: User:Rentier
File:Candle doji dragonfly.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Candle_doji_dragonfly.svg  License: Public Domain  Contributors: User:Rentier
File:Hammer_pattern_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Hammer_pattern_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
Image:Magnify-clip.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Magnify-clip.png  License: GNU Free Documentation License  Contributors: User:Erasoft24
File:Hanging man 03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Hanging_man_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
File:Shooting_star_03.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Shooting_star_03.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: User:Altafqadir
File:Candle marubozu white.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Candle_marubozu_white.svg  License: Public Domain  Contributors: User:Rentier
File:Candle marubozu black.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Candle_marubozu_black.svg  License: Public Domain  Contributors: User:Rentier
File:Candle spinning white.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Candle_spinning_white.svg  License: Public Domain  Contributors: User:Rentier
File:Candle spinning black.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Candle_spinning_black.svg  License: Public Domain  Contributors: User:Rentier
image:Three white soldiers.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Three_white_soldiers.jpg  License: Public Domain  Contributors: User:Rgfolsom
image:Three black crows.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Three_black_crows.jpg  License: Public Domain  Contributors: User:Rgfolsom
Image:morningstar-wikipedia.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Morningstar-wikipedia.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors:
User:Commontrader
Image:morningstar2-wikipedia.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Morningstar2-wikipedia.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors:
User:Commontrader
Image:MACDpicwiki.gif  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:MACDpicwiki.gif  License: GNU Free Documentation License  Contributors: Tradermatt, 2 anonymous edits
Image:Weighted moving average weights N=15.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Weighted_moving_average_weights_N=15.png  License: GNU Free
Documentation License  Contributors: Kevin Ryde
Image:Exponential moving average weights N=15.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Exponential_moving_average_weights_N=15.png  License: GNU Free
Documentation License  Contributors: Kevin Ryde
Image:PARSAR EBAY 2002.gif  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:PARSAR_EBAY_2002.gif  License: unknown  Contributors: Karol Langner
Image:Triple exponential moving average weightings N=10.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Triple_exponential_moving_average_weightings_N=10.png  License:
GNU Free Documentation License  Contributors: Kevin Ryde
Image:A_Vortex_Pattern_in_the_Markets.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:A_Vortex_Pattern_in_the_Markets.jpg  License: Public Domain  Contributors:
User:Vickypedia30
Image:The_Vortex_Indicator.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:The_Vortex_Indicator.jpg  License: Public Domain  Contributors: User:Vickypedia30
Image:14-Period_Daily_Vortex_Indicator_for_Crude_Oil.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:14-Period_Daily_Vortex_Indicator_for_Crude_Oil.jpg  License: Public
Domain  Contributors: Vickypedia30 (talk). Original uploader was Vickypedia30 at en.wikipedia
Image:Price_Chart_for_Crude_Oil.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Price_Chart_for_Crude_Oil.jpg  License: Public Domain  Contributors: User:Vickypedia30
Image:RSIwiki.gif  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:RSIwiki.gif  License: Public Domain  Contributors: Tradermatt at en.wikipedia
Image:rsi-divergence.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Rsi-divergence.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors: Chepurko
Image:Stochasticspicwiki.gif  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Stochasticspicwiki.gif  License: GNU Free Documentation License  Contributors: Tradermatt
Image:Stochastic-divergence.jpg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Stochastic-divergence.jpg  License: Creative Commons Attribution 3.0  Contributors:
User:CommontraderImage Sources, Licenses and Contributors 178
Image:BollingerBandsSPX.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:BollingerBandsSPX.svg  License: Creative Commons Attribution-Sharealike 3.0  Contributors:
User:Bbands
Image:standard deviation diagram.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Standard_deviation_diagram.svg  License: Public Domain  Contributors: User:mwtoews
File:cumulativeSD.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:CumulativeSD.svg  License: Public Domain  Contributors: User:Inductiveload, User:Wolfkeeper
Image:Standard deviation illustration.gif  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Standard_deviation_illustration.gif  License: unknown  Contributors: Forlornturtle
File:Comparison standard deviations.svg  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Comparison_standard_deviations.svg  License: Public Domain  Contributors: User:JRBrown
Image:CCIwiki.gif  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:CCIwiki.gif  License: Public Domain  Contributors: Tradermatt, 1 anonymous edits
Image:Keltner channel example.png  Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Keltner_channel_example.png  License: unknown  Contributors: Kevin RydeLicense 179
License
Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 Unported
http:/ / creativecommons. org/ licenses/ by-sa/ 3. 0/